


Network Working Group                                           E. Wilde
Internet-Draft                                               UC Berkeley
Updates: 2046 (if approved)                                    M. Duerst
Intended status: Standards Track                Aoyama Gakuin University
Expires: July 21, 2007                                      Jan 17, 2007


         URI Fragment Identifiers for the text/plain Media Type
                      draft-wilde-text-fragment-06

Status of this Memo

   By submitting this Internet-Draft, each author represents that any
   applicable patent or other IPR claims of which he or she is aware
   have been or will be disclosed, and any of which he or she becomes
   aware will be disclosed, in accordance with Section 6 of BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that
   other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
   Drafts.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt.

   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.

   This Internet-Draft will expire on July 21, 2007.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (C) The IETF Trust (2007).

Abstract

   This memo defines URI fragment identifiers for text/plain MIME
   entities.  These fragment identifiers make it possible to refer to
   parts of a text/plain MIME entity, identified by character count or
   range, line count or range, or a regular expression.  These
   identification methods can be combined to identify more than one sub-
   resource of a text/plain MIME entity.  Fragment identifiers may also
   contain hash information to make them more robust.



Wilde & Duerst            Expires July 21, 2007                 [Page 1]

Internet-Draft       text/plain Fragment Identifiers            Jan 2007


Table of Contents

   1.  Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  3
     1.1.  What is text/plain?  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  3
     1.2.  What is a URI Fragment Identifier? . . . . . . . . . . . .  3
     1.3.  Why text/plain Fragment Identifiers? . . . . . . . . . . .  4
     1.4.  Incremental Deployment . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  5
     1.5.  Notation Used in this Memo . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  5
   2.  Fragment Identification Methods  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  5
     2.1.  Fragment Identification Principles . . . . . . . . . . . .  6
       2.1.1.  Positions and Ranges . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  6
       2.1.2.  Characters and Lines . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  7
     2.2.  Combining the Principles . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  7
       2.2.1.  Character Position . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  7
       2.2.2.  Character Range  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  7
       2.2.3.  Line Position  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  8
       2.2.4.  Line Range . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  8
     2.3.  Regular Expressions  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  8
     2.4.  Combining Fragment Identification Scheme Parts . . . . . .  8
     2.5.  Fragment Identifier Robustness . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  9
   3.  Fragment Identification Syntax . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  9
     3.1.  Non-ASCII Characters in Regular Expressions  . . . . . . . 10
     3.2.  Hash Sums  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11
   4.  Fragment Identifier Processing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11
     4.1.  Handling of Line Endings in text/plain MIME Entities . . . 11
     4.2.  Handling of Position Values  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
     4.3.  Handling of Hash Sums  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
     4.4.  Syntax Errors in Fragment Identifiers  . . . . . . . . . . 12
   5.  Examples . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
   6.  IANA Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14
   7.  Security Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14
   8.  Change Log . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15
     8.1.  From -05 to -06  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15
     8.2.  From -04 to -05  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 16
     8.3.  From -03 to -04  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 16
     8.4.  From -02 to -03  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 17
     8.5.  From -01 to -02  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 17
     8.6.  From -00 to -01  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 17
   9.  References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 18
     9.1.  Normative References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 18
     9.2.  Non-Normative References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 18
   Appendix A.  Acknowledgements  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 19
   Authors' Addresses . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 19
   Intellectual Property and Copyright Statements . . . . . . . . . . 20







Wilde & Duerst            Expires July 21, 2007                 [Page 2]

Internet-Draft       text/plain Fragment Identifiers            Jan 2007


1.  Introduction

   This memo updates the text/plain MIME type defined in RFC 2046 [1] by
   defining URI fragment identifiers for text/plain MIME entities.  This
   makes it possible to refer to parts of a text/plain MIME entity.
   Such parts can be identifier by character count or range, line count
   or range, or a regular expression.  Hash information can be added to
   a fragment identifier to make it more robust.

   This section gives an introduction to the general concepts of text/
   plain MIME entities and URI fragment identifiers, and discusses the
   need for fragment identifiers for text/plain and deployment issues.
   Section 2 discusses the principles and methods on which this memo is
   based.  Section 3 gives the syntax, and Section 4 discusses
   processing of text/plain fragment identifiers.  Section 5 shows some
   examples.

1.1.  What is text/plain?

   Internet Media Types as defined in RFC 2045 [2] and RFC 2046 [1] are
   used to identify different types and sub-types of media.  RFC 2046
   [1] and RFC 3676 [3] specify the text/plain media type, which is used
   for simple, unformatted text.  Quoting from RFC 2046 [1]: "Plain text
   does not provide for or allow formatting commands, font attribute
   specifications, processing instructions, interpretation directives,
   or content markup.  Plain text is seen simply as a linear sequence of
   characters, possibly interrupted by line breaks or page breaks."

   The text/plain media type does not restrict the character encoding,
   any character encoding may be used.  In the absence of an explicit
   character encoding declaration, US-ASCII is assumed as the default
   character encoding.  This variability of the character encoding makes
   it impossible to count characters in a text/plain MIME entity without
   taking the character encoding into account, because there are many
   character encodings using more than one octet per character.

   The biggest advantage of text/plain MIME entities is their ease of
   use and their portability among different platforms.  As long as they
   use popular character encodings (such as US-ASCII or UTF-8), they can
   be displayed and processed on virtually every computer system.  The
   only remaining interoperability issue is the representation of line
   endindings, which is discussed in Section 4.1.

1.2.  What is a URI Fragment Identifier?

   URIs are the identification mechanism for resources on the Web. The
   URI syntax specified in RFC 3986 [4] includes as part of a URI a
   fragment identifier, separated by a number sign ('#').  The fragment



Wilde & Duerst            Expires July 21, 2007                 [Page 3]

Internet-Draft       text/plain Fragment Identifiers            Jan 2007


   identifier consists of additional reference information to be
   interpreted by the user agent after the retrieval action has been
   successfully completed.  The semantics of a fragment identifier is a
   property of the data resulting from a retrieval action, regardless of
   the type of URI used in the reference.  Therefore, the format and
   interpretation of fragment identifiers is dependent on the media type
   of the retrieval result.

   The most popular fragment identifier is defined for text/html
   (defined in RFC 2854 [11]), and makes it possible to refer to a
   specific element (identified by the value of a 'name' or 'id'
   attribute) of an HTML document.

1.3.  Why text/plain Fragment Identifiers?

   Referring to specific parts of a resource can be very useful, because
   it enables users and applications to create more specific references.
   Rather than pointing to a whole resource, users can create references
   to the part they really are interested in or want to talk about.
   Even though it is suggested that fragment identification methods are
   specified in a media type's MIME registration (see [12]), many media
   types do not have fragment identification methods associated with
   them.

   Fragment identifiers are only useful if supported by the client,
   because they are only interpreted by the client.  Therefore, a new
   fragment identification method will require some time to be adopted
   by clients, and older clients will not support it.  However, because
   the URI still works even if the fragment identifier is not supported
   (the resource is retrieved, but the fragment identifier is not
   interpreted), rapid adoption is not highly critical to ensure the
   success of a new fragment identification method.

   Fragment identifiers for text/plain as defined in this memo make it
   possible to refer to specific parts of a text/plain MIME entity,
   using concepts of positions and ranges, which may be applied to
   characters and lines.  They also support locating a fragment by using
   a regular expression for searching for a specific character sequence.
   Thus, text/plain fragment identifiers enable users to exchange
   information more specifically, thereby reducing time and effort that
   is necessary to manually search for the relevant part of a text/plain
   MIME entity.

   The text/plain format does not support the embedding of links, so in
   normal environments, text/plain resources can only serve as targets
   for links, and not as sources.  However, when combining the text/
   plain fragment identifiers specified in this memo with out-of-line
   linking mechanisms such as XLink [13], it is possible to "embed" link



Wilde & Duerst            Expires July 21, 2007                 [Page 4]

Internet-Draft       text/plain Fragment Identifiers            Jan 2007


   sources into text/plain resources.  Thus, the text/plain fragment
   identifiers specified in this memo open a path for plain/text files
   to become fully integrated resources in hypermedia systems such as
   the Web.

1.4.  Incremental Deployment

   As long as support for text/plain fragment identifiers is not
   implemented everywhere, it is important to consider the implications
   of incremental deployment.  Clients (for example, Web browsers) not
   supporting the text/plain fragment identifier described in this memo
   will work with URI references to text/plain MIME entities, but they
   will fail to locate the sub-resource identified by the fragment
   identifier.  This is a reasonable fallback behavior, and in general
   users should take into account the possibility that a program
   interpreting a given URI will fail to interpret the fragment
   identifier part.  Since fragment identifier evaluation is local to
   the client (and happens after retrieving the MIME entity), there is
   no way for a server to determine whether a requesting client is using
   a URI containing a fragment identifier.

1.5.  Notation Used in this Memo

   The capitalized key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL",
   "SHALL NOT", "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and
   "OPTIONAL" in this document are to be interpreted as described in RFC
   2119 [5].


2.  Fragment Identification Methods

   The identification of fragments of text/plain MIME entities can be
   based on different foundations.  Since it is not possible to insert
   explicit, invisible identifiers into a text/plain MIME entity (as for
   example used in HTML documents, implemented through dedicated
   attributes), fragment identification has to rely on certain inherent
   properties of the MIME entity.  This memo specifies fragment
   identification using six different methods, which are character
   positions and ranges, line positions and ranges, regular expression
   matching, and a mechanism for improving the robustness of fragment
   identifiers (entity hashes).

   When interpreting character or line numbers, implementations MUST
   take the character encoding of the MIME entity into account, because
   character count and octet count may differ for the character encoding
   being used.  For example, a MIME entity using UTF-16 encoding (as
   specified in RFC 2718 [14]) uses two octets per character in most
   cases, and sometimes four octets per character.  It can also have a



Wilde & Duerst            Expires July 21, 2007                 [Page 5]

Internet-Draft       text/plain Fragment Identifiers            Jan 2007


   leading BOM (Byte-Order Mark), which does not count as a character
   and thus also affects the mapping from a simple octet count to a
   character count.

2.1.  Fragment Identification Principles

   Fragment identification can be done using regular expressions or
   combining two orthogonal principles, which are positions and ranges,
   and characters and lines.  This section describes the principles
   themselves, while Section 2.2 describes the combination of the
   principles.

2.1.1.  Positions and Ranges

   A position does not identify an actual fragment of the MIME entity,
   but a position inside the MIME entity, which can be regarded as a
   fragment of zero length.  The use case for positions is to provide
   pointers for applications which may use them to implement
   functionalities such as "insert some text here", which needs a
   position rather than a fragment.  Positions are counted from zero,
   position zero being before the first character or line of a text/
   plain MIME entity.  Thus a text/plain MIME entity having one
   character has two positions, one before the first character (position
   0), and one after the first character (position 1).

   Since positions are fragments of length zero, applications SHOULD use
   other methods than highlighting to indicate positions, the most
   obvious way being the positioning of a cursor (if the application
   supports the concept of a cursor).

   Ranges, on the other hand, identify fragments of a MIME entity that
   have a length that may be greater than zero.  As a general principle
   for ranges, they specify both a lower and a upper bound.  The start
   or the end of a range specification may be omitted, defaulting to the
   first repectively last position of the MIME entity.  The end of a
   range must have a value greater than or equal to the start.  A range
   with identical start and end is legal, and identifies a range of
   length 0, which is equivalent to a position.

   Applications that support a concept such as highlighting SHOULD use
   such a concept to indicate fragments of length greater than zero to
   the user.

   For positions and ranges it is implicitly assumed that if a number is
   greater than the actual number of elements in the MIME entity, then
   it is referring to the last element of the MIME entity (see Section 4
   for details).




Wilde & Duerst            Expires July 21, 2007                 [Page 6]

Internet-Draft       text/plain Fragment Identifiers            Jan 2007


2.1.2.  Characters and Lines

   The concept of positions and ranges can be applied to characters or
   lines.  In both cases, positions indicate points between entities,
   while ranges identify zero or more entities by indicating positions.

   Character positions are numbered starting with zero (ignoring initial
   BOM marks or similar concepts that are not part of the actual textual
   content of a text/plain MIME entity), and counting each character
   separately, with the exception of line endings, which are always
   counted as one character (see Section 4.1 for details).

   Line positions are numbered starting with zero (with line position
   zero always being identical with character position zero), with
   Section 4.1 describing how line endings are be identified.  Fragments
   identified by lines include the line endings, so applications
   identifying line-based fragments MUST include the line endings in the
   fragment identification they are using (e.g., the highlighted
   selection).  If a MIME entity does not contain any line endings, then
   it consists of a single (the first) line.

2.2.  Combining the Principles

   In the following sections, the principles described in the preceding
   section (positions/ranges and characters/lines) are combined,
   resulting in four use cases.  The fragment identifier syntax,
   described in detail in Section 3, uses various schemes for different
   purposes.

2.2.1.  Character Position

   To identify a character position (i.e., a fragment of length zero
   between two characters), the 'char' scheme followed by a single
   number is used.  Rather than identifying a fragment consisting of a
   number of characters, this method identifies a position between two
   characters (or before the first or after the last character).
   Character position counting starts with 0, so the character position
   before the first character of a text/plain MIME entity has the
   character position 0, and a MIME entity containing n distinct
   characters has n+1 distinct character positions, the last one having
   the character position n.

2.2.2.  Character Range

   To identify a fragment of one or more characters (a character range),
   the 'char' scheme followed by a range specification is used.  A
   character range is a consecutive region of the MIME entity that
   extends from the starting character position of the range to the



Wilde & Duerst            Expires July 21, 2007                 [Page 7]

Internet-Draft       text/plain Fragment Identifiers            Jan 2007


   ending character position of the range.

2.2.3.  Line Position

   To identify a line position (i.e., a fragment of length zero between
   two lines), the 'line' scheme followed by a single number is used.
   Rather than identifying a fragment consisting of a number of lines,
   this method identifies a position between two lines (or before the
   first or after the last line).  Line position counting starts with 0,
   so the line position before the first line of a text/plain MIME
   entity has the line position 0, and a MIME entity containing n
   distinct lines has n+1 distinct line positions, the last one having
   the line position n.

2.2.4.  Line Range

   To identify a fragment of one or more lines (a line range), the
   'line' scheme followed by a range specification is used.  A line
   range is a consecutive region of the MIME entity that extends from
   the starting line position of the range to the ending line position
   of the range.

2.3.  Regular Expressions

   A common problem with fragment identifiers is their robustness (to
   changes in the MIME entity), and character and line counts can break
   very easily.  A more robust way of identifying a fragment is by
   searching for a specific pattern.  Using the 'match' scheme, it is
   possible to use a Basic Regular Expression (BRE) as defined by ISO
   9945-2 [6] (the POSIX standard) as a fragment identifier.  For
   another way of making fragment identifiers more robust, see
   Section 2.5.

2.4.  Combining Fragment Identification Scheme Parts

   In most cases, a fragment identifier will consist of only one
   fragment identification scheme part.  However, by concatenating them,
   separated with a semicolon, it is possible to use several fragment
   identification scheme parts in a fragment identifier.  The whole
   fragment identifier refers to the union of all fragments of the text/
   plain MIME entity identified by the individual fragment
   identification scheme parts.  In this way, it is possible to identify
   disjoint ranges, such as multiple line ranges.

   It should be noticed that regular expressions by themselves may
   identify disjoint fragments, which is true in any case where the
   regular expression matches more than one occurrence in the MIME
   entity.



Wilde & Duerst            Expires July 21, 2007                 [Page 8]

Internet-Draft       text/plain Fragment Identifiers            Jan 2007


   Since disjoint fragments can be identified, implementations SHOULD
   make sure that these fragments are appropriately marked, for example
   by highlighting the fragment (rather than only scrolling to some
   line, which only identifies a single position in the MIME entity).
   If an implementation can not mark disjoint fragments, it MAY resort
   to marking only the first of the disjoint fragments.  However, the
   exact method of how implementations deal with disjoint fragments
   depends on the application and interface, and is beyond the scope of
   this memo.

2.5.  Fragment Identifier Robustness

   While regular expressions (as described in Section 2.3) may make
   fragment identifiers more robust than character or line counts, it is
   still possible that modifications of the resource will break the
   fragment identifier.  If applications want to create more robust
   fragment identifiers, they may do so by adding hash sums to fragment
   identifiers.  These hash sums are used to detect a change in the
   resource.  Applications can then warn users about the possibility
   that a fragment identifier might have been broken by a modification
   of the resource.

   Since fragment identifiers are interpreted by clients, hash sums are
   defined on MIME entities rather than the resource itself, and as such
   are specific to a certain representation of the resource, in case of
   text/plain resources the character encoding of the MIME entity.

   Hash sums may specify the character encoding that has been used when
   creating the hash sums, and if such a specification is present,
   clients MUST check whether the character encoding specified for the
   hash sum and the character encoding of the retrieved MIME entity are
   equal, and clients MUST NOT check the hash sum if these values
   differ.  However, clients MAY choose to transcode the retrieved MIME
   entity in the case of differing character encodings, and after doing
   so, check the hash sum.  Please note that this method is inhererently
   unreliable, because certain characters or character sequences may
   have been lost or normalized due to restrictions in one of the
   character encodings used.


3.  Fragment Identification Syntax

   The syntax for the fragment identifiers is straightforward.  The
   syntax defines four schemes, 'char', 'line', 'match', and hash (which
   can either be 'length' or 'md5').  The 'char' and 'line' schemes can
   be used in two different variants, either the position variant (with
   a single number), or the range variant (with two comma-separated
   numbers).  The 'match' scheme has a regular expression as its



Wilde & Duerst            Expires July 21, 2007                 [Page 9]

Internet-Draft       text/plain Fragment Identifiers            Jan 2007


   parameter, which must be specified as a string with escaped
   semicolons (because the semicolon is used to concatenate multiple
   fragment identification scheme parts).  The hash scheme can either
   use the 'length' or the 'md5' scheme to specify a hash value.

   The following syntax definition uses ABNF as defined in RFC 4234 [7],
   including the rules DIGIT and HEXDIG.


  text-fragment =  text-scheme 0*( ";" text-scheme) 0*( ";" hash-scheme)
  text-scheme   =  ( char-scheme / line-scheme / match-scheme )
  hash-scheme   =  ( length-scheme / md5-scheme ) [ "," charenc ]
  char-scheme   =  %x63.68.61.72 "=" ( position / range )  ; "char="
  line-scheme   =  %x6C.69.6E.65 "=" ( position / range )  ; "line="
  match-scheme  =  %x6D.61.74.63.68 "=" regex  ; "match="
  position      =  number
  range         =  (position "," [ position ]) / ("," position )
  number        =  1*( DIGIT )
  regex         =  StringWithEscapedSemicolon
  length-scheme =  %x6C.65.6E.67.74.68 "=" number  ; "length="
  md5-scheme    =  %x6D.64 "5=" md5-value  ; "md5="
  md5-value     =  32HEXDIG
  charenc       =  StringWithEscapedSemicolon

   The StringWithEscapedSemicolon is a string where all characters may
   appear literally (except the characters which are required by the URI
   syntax to be escaped), with the exception of a semicolon.  A
   semicolon that is part of the regular expression must be escaped with
   a leading backslash, and implementations MUST properly interpret
   regular expressions, dereferencing all escape mechanisms that apply,
   i.e. any escaping present due to the context of the URI, semicolon
   escaping, URI percent-encoding, and BRE escaping, in that order).

3.1.  Non-ASCII Characters in Regular Expressions

   RFC 3986 [4] only allows a subset of ASCII as characters in URIs.
   Non-ASCII octets can be included using percent-encoding.  Non-ASCII
   characters in regular expressions MUST be encoded using UTF-8 [8]
   before applying percent-encoding, and MUST be interpreted using UTF-8
   after resolving percent-encoding.  Therefore, using Internationalized
   Resource Identifiers (IRIs) [9] it is possible to use non-ASCII
   characters directly in regular expressions.  Implementations that
   support plain text fragment identifiers for documents not encoded in
   US-ASCII SHOULD support regular expressions with non-ASCII
   characters, or MUST ignore such regular expressions.






Wilde & Duerst            Expires July 21, 2007                [Page 10]

Internet-Draft       text/plain Fragment Identifiers            Jan 2007


3.2.  Hash Sums

   A hash sum can either specify a MIME entity's length, or its MD5
   fingerprint.  In both cases, it can optionally specify the character
   encoding which had been used when calculating the hash sum, so that
   clients interpreting the fragment identifier may check whether they
   are using the same character encoding for their calculations.  For
   lenghts, the character encoding can be necessary because it can
   influence the character count.  As an example, Unicode includes
   precomposed characters for writing Vietnamese, but in the windows-
   1258 encoding, also used for writing Vietnamese, some characters have
   to be encoded with separate diacritics, which means that two
   characters are counted.  Applying Unicode terminology, this means
   that the length of a text/plain MIME entity is computed based on its
   "code points".  For MD5 fingerprints, the character encoding is
   necessary because the MD5 algorithm works on the binary
   representation of the text/plain resource.

   The length of a text/plain MIME entity is calculated by using the
   principles defined in Section 2.1.2.  The MD5 fingerprint of a text/
   plain MIME entity is calculated by using the algorithm presented in
   [10], encoding the result in 16 hexadecimal digits (using uppercase
   or lowercase letters) as a representation of the 128 bits which are
   the result of the MD5 algorithm.


4.  Fragment Identifier Processing

4.1.  Handling of Line Endings in text/plain MIME Entities

   In Internet messages, line endings in text/plain MIME entities are
   represented by CR+LF character sequences (see RFC 2046 [1] and RFC
   3676 [3]).  However, some protocols (such as HTTP) in addition allow
   other conventions for line breaks.  Also, some operating systems
   store text/plain entities locally with different line endings (in
   most cases, Unix uses LF, MacOS uses CR, and Windows uses CR+LF).

   Independent of the number of bytes or characters used to represent a
   line ending, each line ending MUST be counted as one single
   character.  For the purpose of regular expression matching, all
   representations of line endings MUST be treated as single LF
   characters (matched by \n).  Implementations interpreting text/plain
   fragment identifiers MUST take into account the line ending
   conventions of the protocols and other contexts that they work in.

   As an example, an implementation working in the context of a Web
   browser supporting http: URIs has to support the various line ending
   conventions permitted by HTTP.  As another example, an implementation



Wilde & Duerst            Expires July 21, 2007                [Page 11]

Internet-Draft       text/plain Fragment Identifiers            Jan 2007


   used on local files (e.g. with the file: URI scheme) has to support
   the conventions used for local storage.  All implementations SHOULD
   support the Internet-wide CR+LF line ending convention, and MAY
   support additional conventions not related to the protocols or
   systems they work with.

   Implementers should be aware of the fact that line endings in plain
   text entities can be represented by other characters or character
   sequences than CR+LF.  Besides the abovementioned CR and LF, there
   are also NEL and CR+NEL.  In general, the encoding of line endings
   can also depend on the character encoding of the MIME entity, and
   implementations have to take this into account where necessary.

4.2.  Handling of Position Values

   If any position value (as a position or as part of a range) is
   greater than the length of the actual MIME entity, then it identifies
   the last character or line position of the MIME entity.  If the first
   position value in a range is not present, then the range extends from
   the start of the MIME entity.  If the second position value in a
   range is not present, then the range extends to the end of the MIME
   entity.  If a range scheme's positions are not properly ordered (ie,
   the first number is less than the second), then this scheme part MUST
   be ignored.

4.3.  Handling of Hash Sums

   Clients are not required to implement the handling of hash sums, so
   they MAY choose to ignore hash sum information altogether.  However,
   if they do implement hash sum handling, the following applies:

   If a fragment identifier contains a hash sum, and a client retrieves
   a MIME entity and detects that the hash sum has changed (observing
   the character encoding specification as described in Section 3.2, if
   present), then the client SHOULD NOT interpret any other text/plain
   fragment identifier scheme part.  A client MAY signal this situation
   to the user.

4.4.  Syntax Errors in Fragment Identifiers

   If a fragment identifier contains a syntax error (i.e., does not
   conform to the syntax specified in Section 3), then it MUST be
   ignored by clients.  Clients SHOULD NOT make any attempt to correct
   or guess fragment identifiers.  Syntax errors MAY be reported by
   clients.






Wilde & Duerst            Expires July 21, 2007                [Page 12]

Internet-Draft       text/plain Fragment Identifiers            Jan 2007


5.  Examples

   The following examples show some usages for the fragment identifiers
   defined in this memo.


   http://example.com/text.txt#char=100

   This URI identifies the position after the 100th character of the
   text.txt MIME entity.  It should be noted that it is not clear which
   octet(s) of the MIME entity this will be without retrieving the MIME
   entity and thus knowing which character encoding it is using (in case
   of HTTP, this information will be given in the Content-Type header of
   the response).  If the MIME entity has fewer than 100 characters, the
   URI identifies the position after the MIME entity's last character.


   ftp://example.com/text.txt#line=10,20

   This URI identifies lines 11 to 20 of the text.txt MIME entity.  If
   the MIME entity has fewer than 11 lines, it identifies the position
   after last line.  If the MIME entity has less than 20 but at least 11
   lines, it identifies the lines 11 to the last line of the MIME
   entity.


   http://example.com/text.txt#match=searchterm

   This URI identifies all occurrences of the regular expression
   'searchterm' in the MIME entity, i.e., all occurrences of the string
   'searchterm'.  If there is more than one occurrence, then this URI
   identifies a disjoint fragment, consisting of all of these
   occurrences.  If there is no occurrence of the search term, the URI
   does not identify a fragment.


   ftp://example.com/text.txt#line=,1;match=searchterm

   This URI identifies the first line and all occurrences of the regular
   expression 'searchterm' in the MIME entity.  If there is an
   occurrence of 'searchterm' outside of the first line, then this URI
   identifies a disjoint fragment.


   http://example.com/text.txt#match=hello\;

   This URI identifies all occurrences of the regular expression
   'hello;' in the MIME entity.  The semicolon with the leading



Wilde & Duerst            Expires July 21, 2007                [Page 13]

Internet-Draft       text/plain Fragment Identifiers            Jan 2007


   backslash has to be interpreted as a literal semicolon inside of the
   BRE, treating the '\;' as an escaped ';', so that the actual regular
   expression is 'hello;'.  If there is more than one occurrence of this
   regular expression, then this URI identifies a disjoint fragment,
   consisting of all of these occurrences.


   ftp://example.com/text.txt#line=10,20;length=9876,UTF-8

   As in the second example, this URI identifies lines 11 to 20 of the
   text.txt MIME entity.  The additional length hash sum specifies that
   the MIME entity has a length of 9876 characters when encoded in
   UTF-8.  If the client supports the length hash sum scheme, it may
   test the retrieved MIME entity for its length, but only if the
   retrieved MIME entity uses the UTF-8 encoding or has been locally
   trancoded into this encoding.  If the length of the retrieved MIME
   entity does not match the length specified in the fragment
   identifier, the client SHOULD NOT interpret the line part and MAY
   signal this to the user.


6.  IANA Considerations

   Note to RFC Editor: Please change this section to read as follows
   after the IANA action has been completed: "IANA has added a reference
   to this specification in the Text/Plain Media Type registration."

   IANA is requested to update the registration of the MIME Media type
   text/plain at http://www.iana.org/assignments/media-types/text/ with
   the fragment identifier defined in this memo by adding a reference to
   this memo (with the appropriate RFC number once it is known).


7.  Security Considerations

   Regular expression matching code is notoriously vulnerable to buffer
   overflow security holes, so any implementation supporting text/plain
   fragment identifiers SHOULD make sure that the code being used has
   been tested against buffer overflow attacks.

   The fact that software implementing fragment identifiers for plain
   text and software not implementing them differs in behavior, and the
   fact that different software may show fragments to users in different
   ways (in particular for fragments consisting of multiple ranges) can
   lead to misunderstandings on the part of users.  Such
   misunderstandings might be exploited in a way similar to spoofing or
   phishing, although concrete examples of how this might be done are
   not currently known.



Wilde & Duerst            Expires July 21, 2007                [Page 14]

Internet-Draft       text/plain Fragment Identifiers            Jan 2007


   Implementers and users of fragment identifiers for plain text should
   also be aware of the security considerations in RFC 3986 [4] and RFC
   3987 [9].


8.  Change Log

   Note to RFC Editor: Please remove this section before publication.

8.1.  From -05 to -06

   o  Clarified that this is intended as an update of the text/plain
      MIME type registration, in newly added IANA consideration section
      and elswhere.

   o  Added normative reference to UTF-8 (STD63/RFC3629).

   o  Fixed section about non-ASCII characters in regular expressions to
      be more accurate re.  IRIs.

   o  Fixed some text about decomposition and Unicode.

   o  Clarified that UTF-16 can also use 4 octets per character.

   o  Changed ABNF to make sure schemes are case-sensitive (string
      literals in ABNF are case-insensitive).

   o  Used HEXDIG from RFC 4234, made clear DIGIT and HEXDIG are from
      that spec.

   o  Speficied order of decoding the various escapings.

   o  Moved section on line endings to the back, and changed
      requirements to be more in line with practice.

   o  Added IANA Consideration section.

   o  Expanded Security Consideration section.

   o  Removed quote from RFC 3986, because the quoted text doesn't
      actually exist there anymore; changed text appropriately.

   o  Reorganized section two to get rid of one section level.

   o  Added overview in introduction, and some glue text here and there.

   o  Changed to more IETF-like wording in some instances (e.g. intro to
      this section; removing "Compliant software MUST follow this



Wilde & Duerst            Expires July 21, 2007                [Page 15]

Internet-Draft       text/plain Fragment Identifiers            Jan 2007


      specification." at the start of the Introduction,...).

   o  Removed 'where to send comments' section.

   o  Fixed wording is some cases, tried to make shorter sentences and
      eliminate parenthetesized expressions.

   o  Removed acknowledgement for xml2rfc; we are nevertheless very
      grateful for this work!

8.2.  From -04 to -05

   o  Added some explanatory text to the last paragraph of Section 2.5.

   o  Added a paragraph about the importance of having fragment
      identification capabilities for out-of-line linking methods such
      as XLink to Section 1.3.

   o  Added explanation of why the charset is important for length hash
      sums to Section 3.2.

   o  Added text that makes hash sum handling optional and allows
      clients to interpret fragment identifiers even if the hash sum did
      not match (changed MUST NOT to SHOULD NOT) to Section 4.3.

   o  Added example using a length hash sum in Section 5.

   o  RFC 2234 (ABNF) has been obsoleted by [7].

   o  Removed the "Open Issues" section for preparation of final draft
      before submission as RFC.

8.3.  From -03 to -04

   o  URIs are now defined by RFC 3986 [4], so the text and the
      references have been updated.  In particular, RFC3986 defines a
      fragment identifier to be part of the URI, whereas in the
      obsoleted RFC 2396 URI specification, it was not part of a URI as
      such, but of a "URI reference".

   o  IRIs are now defined by RFC 3987 [9], so the text and the
      references have been updated.

   o  Changed IPR clause from RFC 3667 to RFC 3978 (updated version of
      RFC 3667).






Wilde & Duerst            Expires July 21, 2007                [Page 16]

Internet-Draft       text/plain Fragment Identifiers            Jan 2007


8.4.  From -02 to -03

   o  Replaced most occurrences of 'resource' with 'MIME entity',
      because the result of dereferencing a URI is not the resource
      itself, but some MIME entity (in our case of type text/plain)
      representing it.  Thanks to Sandro Hawke for pointing this out.

   o  Moved "Open Issues" to the very back of the document.

   o  Added Section 4 to define the processing model for fragment
      identifiers (moved Section 4.2 from Section 3 to Section 4).

   o  Added hash scheme to make fragment identifiers more robust
      (Section 2.5).

   o  Changed IPR clause from RFC 2026 to RFC 3667 (updated version of
      RFC 2026).

8.5.  From -01 to -02

   o  Fundamental change in semantics: counts turn into positions
      (between characters or lines), so in order to identify a character
      or line, ranges must be used (which now use positions to specify
      the upper and lower bounds of the range).

   o  Made the first value of a range optional as well, so that line=,5
      also is legal, identifying everything from the start of the MIME
      entity to the 5th line.

   o  Changed the syntax from paranthesis-style to a more traditional
      style using equals-signs.

8.6.  From -00 to -01

   o  Made the second count value of ranges optional, so that something
      like line(10,) is legal and properly defined.

   o  Added non-normative reference to Internet draft about non-ASCII
      characters in search strings.

   o  Added Section 1.4 about incremental deployement.

   o  Added more elaborate examples.

   o  Added text about regex buffer overflow problems in Section 7.

   o  Added Section 4.1 about line endings in text/plain resources.




Wilde & Duerst            Expires July 21, 2007                [Page 17]

Internet-Draft       text/plain Fragment Identifiers            Jan 2007


   o  Added "Open Issues" to collect open issues regarding this memo
      (will be deleted in final RFC text).


9.  References

9.1.  Normative References

   [1]   Freed, N. and N. Borenstein, "Multipurpose Internet Mail
         Extensions (MIME) Part Two: Media Types", RFC 2046,
         November 1996.

   [2]   Freed, N. and N. Borenstein, "Multipurpose Internet Mail
         Extensions (MIME) Part One: Format of Internet Message Bodies",
         RFC 2045, November 1996.

   [3]   Gellens, R., "The Text/Plain Format and DelSp Parameters",
         RFC 3676, February 2004.

   [4]   Berners-Lee, T., Fielding, R., and L. Masinter, "Uniform
         Resource Identifier (URI): Generic Syntax", RFC 3986,
         January 2005.

   [5]   Bradner, S., "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate Requirement
         Levels", RFC 2119, March 1997.

   [6]   International Organization for Standardization, "Information
         technology - Portable Operating System Interface (POSIX) - Part
         2: Shell and Utilities", ISO 9945-2, 1993.

   [7]   Crocker, D. and P. Overell, "Augmented BNF for Syntax
         Specifications: ABNF", RFC 4234, October 2005.

   [8]   Yergeau, F., "UTF-8, a transformation format of ISO 10646",
         STD 63, RFC 3629, November 2003.

   [9]   Duerst, M. and M. Suignard, "Internationalized Resource
         Identifiers (IRI)", RFC 3987, January 2005.

   [10]  Rivest, R., "The MD5 Message-Digest Algorithm", RFC 1321,
         April 1992.

9.2.  Non-Normative References

   [11]  Connolly, D. and L. Masinter, "The 'text/html' Media Type",
         RFC 2854, June 2000.

   [12]  Freed, N. and J. Klensin, "Media Type Specifications and



Wilde & Duerst            Expires July 21, 2007                [Page 18]

Internet-Draft       text/plain Fragment Identifiers            Jan 2007


         Registration Procedures", RFC 4288, December 2005.

   [13]  DeRose, S., Maler, E., and D. Orchard, "XML Linking Language
         (XLink) Version 1.0", W3C Recommendation REC-xlink-20010627,
         June 2001.

   [14]  Hoffman, P. and F. Yergeau, "UTF-16, an encoding of ISO 10646",
         RFC 2781, February 2000.


Appendix A.  Acknowledgements

   Thanks for comments and suggestions provided by Marcel Baschnagel,
   John Cowan, Benja Fallenstein, Sandro Hawke, Dan Kohn, Henrik
   Levkowetz, and Ted Hardie.


Authors' Addresses

   Erik Wilde
   UC Berkeley
   School of Information
   Berkeley, CA 94720-4600
   U.S.A.

   Phone: +1-510-6432253
   Email: net.dret@dret.net
   URI:   http://dret.net/netdret/


   Martin Duerst (Note: Please write "Duerst" with u-umlaut wherever possible, for example as "D&#252;rst" in XML and HTML.)
   Aoyama Gakuin University
   5-10-1 Fuchinobe
   Sagamihara, Kanagawa  229-8558
   Japan

   Phone: +81 42 759 6329
   Fax:   +81 42 759 6495
   Email: mailto:duerst@it.aoyama.ac.jp
   URI:   http://www.sw.it.aoyama.ac.jp/D%C3%BCrst/











Wilde & Duerst            Expires July 21, 2007                [Page 19]

Internet-Draft       text/plain Fragment Identifiers            Jan 2007


Full Copyright Statement

   Copyright (C) The IETF Trust (2007).

   This document is subject to the rights, licenses and restrictions
   contained in BCP 78, and except as set forth therein, the authors
   retain all their rights.

   This document and the information contained herein are provided on an
   "AS IS" basis and THE CONTRIBUTOR, THE ORGANIZATION HE/SHE REPRESENTS
   OR IS SPONSORED BY (IF ANY), THE INTERNET SOCIETY, THE IETF TRUST AND
   THE INTERNET ENGINEERING TASK FORCE DISCLAIM ALL WARRANTIES, EXPRESS
   OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF
   THE INFORMATION HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED
   WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.


Intellectual Property

   The IETF takes no position regarding the validity or scope of any
   Intellectual Property Rights or other rights that might be claimed to
   pertain to the implementation or use of the technology described in
   this document or the extent to which any license under such rights
   might or might not be available; nor does it represent that it has
   made any independent effort to identify any such rights.  Information
   on the procedures with respect to rights in RFC documents can be
   found in BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Copies of IPR disclosures made to the IETF Secretariat and any
   assurances of licenses to be made available, or the result of an
   attempt made to obtain a general license or permission for the use of
   such proprietary rights by implementers or users of this
   specification can be obtained from the IETF on-line IPR repository at
   http://www.ietf.org/ipr.

   The IETF invites any interested party to bring to its attention any
   copyrights, patents or patent applications, or other proprietary
   rights that may cover technology that may be required to implement
   this standard.  Please address the information to the IETF at
   ietf-ipr@ietf.org.


Acknowledgment

   Funding for the RFC Editor function is provided by the IETF
   Administrative Support Activity (IASA).





Wilde & Duerst            Expires July 21, 2007                [Page 20]


