


Network Working Group                                           E. Wilde
Internet-Draft                                               UC Berkeley
Updates: 2046 (if approved)                                    M. Duerst
Intended status: Standards Track                Aoyama Gakuin University
Expires: February 11, 2008                               August 10, 2007


         URI Fragment Identifiers for the text/plain Media Type
                      draft-wilde-text-fragment-08

Status of this Memo

   By submitting this Internet-Draft, each author represents that any
   applicable patent or other IPR claims of which he or she is aware
   have been or will be disclosed, and any of which he or she becomes
   aware will be disclosed, in accordance with Section 6 of BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that
   other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
   Drafts.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt.

   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.

   This Internet-Draft will expire on February 11, 2008.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (C) The IETF Trust (2007).

Abstract

   This memo defines URI fragment identifiers for text/plain MIME
   entities.  These fragment identifiers make it possible to refer to
   parts of a text/plain MIME entity, either identified by character
   position or range, or by line position or range.  Fragment
   identifiers may also contain hash information to make them more
   robust.




Wilde & Duerst          Expires February 11, 2008               [Page 1]

Internet-Draft       text/plain Fragment Identifiers         August 2007


Table of Contents

   1.  Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  3
     1.1.  What is text/plain?  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  3
     1.2.  What is a URI Fragment Identifier? . . . . . . . . . . . .  4
     1.3.  Why text/plain Fragment Identifiers? . . . . . . . . . . .  4
     1.4.  Incremental Deployment . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  5
     1.5.  Notation Used in this Memo . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  5
   2.  Fragment Identification Methods  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  5
     2.1.  Fragment Identification Principles . . . . . . . . . . . .  6
       2.1.1.  Positions and Ranges . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  6
       2.1.2.  Characters and Lines . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  7
     2.2.  Combining the Principles . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  7
       2.2.1.  Character Position . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  7
       2.2.2.  Character Range  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  8
       2.2.3.  Line Position  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  8
       2.2.4.  Line Range . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  8
     2.3.  Fragment Identifier Robustness . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  8
   3.  Fragment Identification Syntax . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  9
     3.1.  Hash Sums  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  9
   4.  Fragment Identifier Processing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
     4.1.  Handling of Line Endings in text/plain MIME Entities . . . 10
     4.2.  Handling of Position Values  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11
     4.3.  Handling of Hash Sums  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11
     4.4.  Syntax Errors in Fragment Identifiers  . . . . . . . . . . 11
   5.  Examples . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11
   6.  IANA Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
   7.  Security Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
   8.  Change Log . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
     8.1.  From -07 to -08 (after IETF Last Call) . . . . . . . . . . 13
     8.2.  From -06 to -07 (addressing IETF Last Call Comments) . . . 13
     8.3.  From -05 to -06  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14
     8.4.  From -04 to -05  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15
     8.5.  From -03 to -04  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15
     8.6.  From -02 to -03  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 16
     8.7.  From -01 to -02  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 16
     8.8.  From -00 to -01  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 16
   9.  References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 17
     9.1.  Normative References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 17
     9.2.  Non-Normative References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 17
   Appendix A.  Acknowledgements  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 18
   Authors' Addresses . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 18
   Intellectual Property and Copyright Statements . . . . . . . . . . 20








Wilde & Duerst          Expires February 11, 2008               [Page 2]

Internet-Draft       text/plain Fragment Identifiers         August 2007


1.  Introduction

   This memo updates the text/plain MIME type defined in RFC 2046 [1] by
   defining URI fragment identifiers for text/plain MIME entities.  This
   makes it possible to refer to parts of a text/plain MIME entity.
   Such parts can be identified by either character position or range,
   or by line position or range.  Hash information can be added to a
   fragment identifier to make it more robust, enabling applications to
   detect changes of the entity.

   This section gives an introduction to the general concepts of text/
   plain MIME entities and URI fragment identifiers, and discusses the
   need for fragment identifiers for text/plain and deployment issues.
   Section 2 discusses the principles and methods on which this memo is
   based.  Section 3 defines the syntax, and Section 4 discusses
   processing of text/plain fragment identifiers.  Section 5 shows some
   examples.

1.1.  What is text/plain?

   Internet Media Types (often referred to as "MIME types") as defined
   in RFC 2045 [2] and RFC 2046 [1] are used to identify different types
   and sub-types of media.  RFC 2046 [1] and RFC 3676 [3] specify the
   text/plain media type, which is used for simple, unformatted text.
   Quoting from RFC 2046 [1]: "Plain text does not provide for or allow
   formatting commands, font attribute specifications, processing
   instructions, interpretation directives, or content markup.  Plain
   text is seen simply as a linear sequence of characters, possibly
   interrupted by line breaks or page breaks."

   The text/plain media type does not restrict the character encoding;
   any character encoding may be used.  In the absence of an explicit
   character encoding declaration, US-ASCII [10] is assumed as the
   default character encoding.  This variability of the character
   encoding makes it impossible to count characters in a text/plain MIME
   entity without taking the character encoding into account, because
   there are many character encodings using more than one octet per
   character.

   The biggest advantage of text/plain MIME entities is their ease of
   use and their portability among different platforms.  As long as they
   use popular character encodings (such as US-ASCII or UTF-8 [11]),
   they can be displayed and processed on virtually every computer
   system.  The only remaining interoperability issue is the
   representation of line endings, which is discussed in Section 4.1.






Wilde & Duerst          Expires February 11, 2008               [Page 3]

Internet-Draft       text/plain Fragment Identifiers         August 2007


1.2.  What is a URI Fragment Identifier?

   URIs are the identification mechanism for resources on the Web. The
   URI syntax specified in RFC 3986 [4] optionally includes a so-called
   "fragment identifier", separated by a number sign ('#').  The
   fragment identifier consists of additional reference information to
   be interpreted by the user agent after the retrieval action has been
   successfully completed.  The semantics of a fragment identifier is a
   property of the data resulting from a retrieval action, regardless of
   the type of URI used in the reference.  Therefore, the format and
   interpretation of fragment identifiers is dependent on the media type
   of the retrieval result.

   The most popular fragment identifier is defined for text/html
   (defined in RFC 2854 [12]), and makes it possible to refer to a
   specific element (identified by the value of a 'name' or 'id'
   attribute) of an HTML document.  This makes it possible to reference
   a specific part of a Web page, rather than a Web page as a whole.

1.3.  Why text/plain Fragment Identifiers?

   Referring to specific parts of a resource can be very useful, because
   it enables users and applications to create more specific references.
   Users can create references to the part they really are interested in
   or want to talk about, rather than always pointing to a complete
   resource.  Even though it is suggested that fragment identification
   methods are specified in a media type's MIME registration (see [13]),
   many media types do not have fragment identification methods
   associated with them.

   Fragment identifiers are only useful if supported by the client,
   because they are only interpreted by the client.  Therefore, a new
   fragment identification method will require some time to be adopted
   by clients, and older clients will not support it.  However, because
   the URI still works even if the fragment identifier is not supported
   (the resource is retrieved, but the fragment identifier is not
   interpreted), rapid adoption is not highly critical to ensure the
   success of a new fragment identification method.

   Fragment identifiers for text/plain as defined in this memo make it
   possible to refer to specific parts of a text/plain MIME entity,
   using concepts of positions and ranges, which may be applied to
   characters and lines.  Thus, text/plain fragment identifiers enable
   users to exchange information more specifically, thereby reducing
   time and effort that is necessary to manually search for the relevant
   part of a text/plain MIME entity.

   The text/plain format does not support the embedding of links, so in



Wilde & Duerst          Expires February 11, 2008               [Page 4]

Internet-Draft       text/plain Fragment Identifiers         August 2007


   most environments, text/plain resources can only serve as targets for
   links, and not as sources.  However, when combining the text/plain
   fragment identifiers specified in this memo with out-of-line linking
   mechanisms such as XLink [14], it becomes possible to "bind" link
   resources to text/plain resources and thereby "embed" links into
   text/plain resources.  Thus, the text/plain fragment identifiers
   specified in this memo open a path for text/plain files to become
   bidirectionally navigable resources in hypermedia systems such as the
   Web.

1.4.  Incremental Deployment

   As long as text/plain fragment identifiers are not supported
   universally, it is important to consider the implications of
   incremental deployment.  Clients (for example, Web browsers) not
   supporting the text/plain fragment identifier described in this memo
   will work with URI references to text/plain MIME entities, but they
   will fail to locate the sub-resource identified by the fragment
   identifier.  This is a reasonable fallback behavior, and in general
   users should take into account the possibility that a program
   interpreting a given URI will fail to interpret the fragment
   identifier part.  Since fragment identifier evaluation is local to
   the client (and happens after retrieving the MIME entity), there is
   no reliable way for a server to determine whether a requesting client
   is using a URI containing a fragment identifier.

1.5.  Notation Used in this Memo

   The capitalized key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL",
   "SHALL NOT", "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and
   "OPTIONAL" in this document are to be interpreted as described in RFC
   2119 [5].


2.  Fragment Identification Methods

   The identification of fragments of text/plain MIME entities can be
   based on different foundations.  Since it is not possible to insert
   explicit, invisible identifiers into a text/plain MIME entity (as for
   example used in HTML documents, implemented through dedicated
   attributes), fragment identification has to rely on certain inherent
   properties of the MIME entity.  This memo specifies fragment
   identification using four different methods, which are character
   positions and ranges, and line positions and ranges, augmented by a
   hash sum mechanism for improving the robustness of fragment
   identifiers.

   When interpreting character or line numbers, implementations MUST



Wilde & Duerst          Expires February 11, 2008               [Page 5]

Internet-Draft       text/plain Fragment Identifiers         August 2007


   take the character encoding of the MIME entity into account, because
   character count and octet count may differ for the character encoding
   being used.  For example, a MIME entity using UTF-16 encoding (as
   specified in RFC 2718 [15]) uses two octets per character in most
   cases, and sometimes four octets per character.  It can also have a
   leading BOM (Byte-Order Mark), which does not count as a character
   and thus also affects the mapping from a simple octet count to a
   character count.

2.1.  Fragment Identification Principles

   Fragment identification can be done by combining two orthogonal
   principles, which are positions and ranges, and characters and lines.
   This section describes the principles themselves, while Section 2.2
   describes the combination of the principles.

2.1.1.  Positions and Ranges

   A position does not identify an actual fragment of the MIME entity,
   but a position inside the MIME entity, which can be regarded as a
   fragment of length zero.  The use case for positions is to provide
   pointers for applications which may use them to implement
   functionalities such as "insert some text here", which needs a
   position rather than a fragment.  Positions are counted from zero,
   position zero being before the first character or line of a text/
   plain MIME entity.  Thus a text/plain MIME entity having one
   character has two positions, one before the first character (position
   0), and one after the first character (position 1).

   Since positions are fragments of length zero, applications SHOULD use
   other methods than highlighting to indicate positions, the most
   obvious way being the positioning of a cursor (if the application
   supports the concept of a cursor).

   Ranges, on the other hand, identify fragments of a MIME entity that
   have a length that may be greater than zero.  As a general principle
   for ranges, they specify both a lower and an upper bound.  The start
   or the end of a range specification may be omitted, defaulting to the
   first respectively last position of the MIME entity.  The end of a
   range must have a value greater than or equal to the start.  A range
   with identical start and end is legal, and identifies a range of
   length zero, which is equivalent to a position.

   Applications that support a concept such as highlighting SHOULD use
   such a concept to indicate fragments of lengths greater than zero to
   the user.

   For positions and ranges it is implicitly assumed that if a number is



Wilde & Duerst          Expires February 11, 2008               [Page 6]

Internet-Draft       text/plain Fragment Identifiers         August 2007


   greater than the actual number of elements in the MIME entity, then
   it is referring to the last element of the MIME entity (see Section 4
   for details).

2.1.2.  Characters and Lines

   The concept of positions and ranges can be applied to characters or
   lines.  In both cases, positions indicate points between these
   entities, while ranges identify zero or more of these entities by
   indicating positions.

   Character positions are numbered starting with zero (ignoring initial
   BOM marks or similar concepts that are not part of the actual textual
   content of a text/plain MIME entity), and counting each character
   separately, with the exception of line endings, which are always
   counted as one character (see Section 4.1 for details).

   Line positions are numbered starting with zero (with line position
   zero always being identical with character position zero), with
   Section 4.1 describing how line endings are identified.  Fragments
   identified by lines include the line endings, so applications
   identifying line-based fragments MUST include the line endings in the
   fragment identification they are using (e.g., the highlighted
   selection).  If a MIME entity does not contain any line endings, then
   it consists of a single (the first) line.

2.2.  Combining the Principles

   In the following sections, the principles described in the preceding
   section (positions/ranges and characters/lines) are combined,
   resulting in four use cases.  The schemes mentioned below refer to
   the fragment identifier syntax, described in detail in Section 3.

2.2.1.  Character Position

   To identify a character position (i.e., a fragment of length zero
   between two characters), the 'char' scheme followed by a single
   number is used.  This method identifies a position between two
   characters (or before the first or after the last character), rather
   than identifying a fragment consisting of a number of characters.
   Character position counting starts with 0, so the character position
   before the first character of a text/plain MIME entity has the
   character position 0, and a MIME entity containing n distinct
   characters has n+1 distinct character positions, the last one having
   the character position n.






Wilde & Duerst          Expires February 11, 2008               [Page 7]

Internet-Draft       text/plain Fragment Identifiers         August 2007


2.2.2.  Character Range

   To identify a fragment of one or more characters (a character range),
   the 'char' scheme followed by a range specification is used.  A
   character range is a consecutive region of the MIME entity that
   extends from the starting character position of the range to the
   ending character position of the range.

2.2.3.  Line Position

   To identify a line position (i.e., a fragment of length zero between
   two lines), the 'line' scheme followed by a single number is used.
   This method identifies a position between two lines (or before the
   first or after the last line), rather than identifying a fragment
   consisting of a number of lines.  Line position counting starts with
   0, so the line position before the first line of a text/plain MIME
   entity has the line position 0, and a MIME entity containing n
   distinct lines has n+1 distinct line positions, the last one having
   the line position n.

2.2.4.  Line Range

   To identify a fragment of one or more lines (a line range), the
   'line' scheme followed by a range specification is used.  A line
   range is a consecutive region of the MIME entity that extends from
   the starting line position of the range to the ending line position
   of the range.

2.3.  Fragment Identifier Robustness

   It is easily possible that a modification of the referenced resource
   will break a fragment identifier.  If applications want to create
   more robust fragment identifiers, they may do so by adding hash sums
   to fragment identifiers.  These hash sums are used to detect changes
   in the resource.  Applications can then warn users about the
   possibility that a fragment identifier might have been broken by a
   modification of the resource.

   Since fragment identifiers are interpreted by clients, hash sums are
   defined on MIME entities rather than on the resource itself, and as
   such are specific to a certain representation of the resource, in
   case of text/plain resources the character encoding of the MIME
   entity.

   Hash sums may specify the character encoding that has been used when
   creating the hash sums, and if such a specification is present,
   clients MUST check whether the character encoding specified for the
   hash sum and the character encoding of the retrieved MIME entity are



Wilde & Duerst          Expires February 11, 2008               [Page 8]

Internet-Draft       text/plain Fragment Identifiers         August 2007


   equal, and clients MUST NOT check the hash sum if these values
   differ.  However, clients MAY choose to transcode the retrieved MIME
   entity in the case of differing character encodings, and after doing
   so, check the hash sum.  Please note that this method is inherently
   unreliable, because certain characters or character sequences may
   have been lost or normalized due to restrictions in one of the
   character encodings used.


3.  Fragment Identification Syntax

   The syntax for the text/plain fragment identifiers is
   straightforward.  The syntax defines three schemes, 'char', 'line',
   and hash (which can either be 'length' or 'md5').  The 'char' and
   'line' schemes can be used in two different variants, either the
   position variant (with a single number), or the range variant (with
   two comma-separated numbers).  The hash scheme can either use the
   'length' or the 'md5' scheme to specify a hash value. 'length' in
   this case serves as a very weak but easy to calculate hash function.

   The following syntax definition uses ABNF as defined in RFC 4234 [6],
   including the rules DIGIT and HEXDIG.  The mime-charset rule is
   defined in RFC 2978 [7].

   NOTE:  In the descriptions that follow, specified text values MUST be
      used exactly as given, using exactly the indicated lower-case
      letters.  In this respect, the ABNF usage differs from [6].


   text-fragment =  text-scheme 0*( ";" hash-scheme)
   text-scheme   =  ( char-scheme / line-scheme )
   char-scheme   =  "char=" ( position / range )
   line-scheme   =  "line=" ( position / range )
   hash-scheme   =  ( length-scheme / md5-scheme ) [ "," mime-charset ]
   position      =  number
   range         =  (position "," [ position ]) / ("," position )
   number        =  1*( DIGIT )
   length-scheme =  "length=" number
   md5-scheme    =  "md5=" md5-value
   md5-value     =  32HEXDIG

3.1.  Hash Sums

   A hash sum can either specify a MIME entity's length, or its MD5
   fingerprint.  In both cases, it can optionally specify the character
   encoding which had been used when calculating the hash sum, so that
   clients interpreting the fragment identifier may check whether they
   are using the same character encoding for their calculations.  For



Wilde & Duerst          Expires February 11, 2008               [Page 9]

Internet-Draft       text/plain Fragment Identifiers         August 2007


   lengths, the character encoding can be necessary because it can
   influence the character count.  As an example, Unicode includes
   precomposed characters for writing Vietnamese, but in the windows-
   1258 encoding, also used for writing Vietnamese, some characters have
   to be encoded with separate diacritics, which means that two
   characters will be counted.  Applying Unicode terminology, this means
   that the length of a text/plain MIME entity is computed based on its
   "code points".  For MD5 fingerprints, the character encoding is
   necessary because the MD5 algorithm works on the binary
   representation of the text/plain resource.

   The length of a text/plain MIME entity is calculated by using the
   principles defined in Section 2.1.2.  The MD5 fingerprint of a text/
   plain MIME entity is calculated by using the algorithm presented in
   [8], encoding the result in 16 hexadecimal digits (using uppercase or
   lowercase letters) as a representation of the 128 bits which are the
   result of the MD5 algorithm.  Calculation of hash sums is done after
   stripping any potential content-encodings or content-transfer-
   encodings of the transport mechanism.


4.  Fragment Identifier Processing

   Applications implementing support for the mechanism described in this
   memo MUST behave as described in the following sections.

4.1.  Handling of Line Endings in text/plain MIME Entities

   In Internet messages, line endings in text/plain MIME entities are
   represented by CR+LF character sequences (see RFC 2046 [1] and RFC
   3676 [3]).  However, some protocols (such as HTTP) in addition allow
   other conventions for line endings.  Also, some operating systems
   store text/plain entities locally with different line endings (in
   most cases, Unix uses LF, MacOS traditionally used CR, and Windows
   uses CR+LF).

   Independent of the number of bytes or characters used to represent a
   line ending, each line ending MUST be counted as one single
   character.  Implementations interpreting text/plain fragment
   identifiers MUST take into account the line ending conventions of the
   protocols and other contexts that they work in.

   As an example, an implementation working in the context of a Web
   browser supporting http: URIs has to support the various line ending
   conventions permitted by HTTP.  As another example, an implementation
   used on local files (e.g. with the file: URI scheme) has to support
   the conventions used for local storage.  All implementations SHOULD
   support the Internet-wide CR+LF line ending convention, and MAY



Wilde & Duerst          Expires February 11, 2008              [Page 10]

Internet-Draft       text/plain Fragment Identifiers         August 2007


   support additional conventions not related to the protocols or
   systems they work with.

   Implementers should be aware of the fact that line endings in plain
   text entities can be represented by other characters or character
   sequences than CR+LF.  Besides the abovementioned CR and LF, there
   are also NEL and CR+NEL.  In general, the encoding of line endings
   can also depend on the character encoding of the MIME entity, and
   implementations have to take this into account where necessary.

4.2.  Handling of Position Values

   If any position value (as a position or as part of a range) is
   greater than the length of the actual MIME entity, then it identifies
   the last character position or line position of the MIME entity.  If
   the first position value in a range is not present, then the range
   extends from the start of the MIME entity.  If the second position
   value in a range is not present, then the range extends to the end of
   the MIME entity.  If a range scheme's positions are not properly
   ordered (ie, the first number is less than the second), then the
   fragment identifier MUST be ignored.

4.3.  Handling of Hash Sums

   Clients are not required to implement the handling of hash sums, so
   they MAY choose to ignore hash sum information altogether.  However,
   if they do implement hash sum handling, the following applies:

   If a fragment identifier contains a hash sum, and a client retrieves
   a MIME entity and detects that the hash sum has changed (observing
   the character encoding specification as described in Section 3.1, if
   present), then the client SHOULD NOT interpret the text/plain
   fragment identifier.  A client MAY signal this situation to the user.

4.4.  Syntax Errors in Fragment Identifiers

   If a fragment identifier contains a syntax error (i.e., does not
   conform to the syntax specified in Section 3), then it MUST be
   ignored by clients.  Clients MUST NOT make any attempt to correct or
   guess fragment identifiers.  Syntax errors MAY be reported by
   clients.


5.  Examples

   The following examples show some usages for the fragment identifiers
   defined in this memo.




Wilde & Duerst          Expires February 11, 2008              [Page 11]

Internet-Draft       text/plain Fragment Identifiers         August 2007


   http://example.com/text.txt#char=100

   This URI identifies the position after the 100th character of the
   text.txt MIME entity.  It should be noted that it is not clear which
   octet(s) of the MIME entity this will be without retrieving the MIME
   entity and thus knowing which character encoding it is using (in case
   of HTTP, this information will be given in the Content-Type header of
   the response).  If the MIME entity has fewer than 100 characters, the
   URI identifies the position after the MIME entity's last character.


   ftp://example.com/text.txt#line=10,20

   This URI identifies lines 11 to 20 of the text.txt MIME entity.  If
   the MIME entity has fewer than 11 lines, it identifies the position
   after the last line.  If the MIME entity has less than 20 but at
   least 11 lines, it identifies the range from line 11 to the last line
   of the MIME entity.


   ftp://example.com/text.txt#line=,1

   This URI identifies the first line.


   ftp://example.com/text.txt#line=10,20;length=9876,UTF-8

   As in the second example, this URI identifies lines 11 to 20 of the
   text.txt MIME entity.  The additional length hash sum specifies that
   the MIME entity has a length of 9876 characters when encoded in
   UTF-8.  If the client supports the length hash sum scheme, it may
   test the retrieved MIME entity for its length, but only if the
   retrieved MIME entity uses the UTF-8 encoding or has been locally
   transcoded into this encoding.


6.  IANA Considerations

   Note to RFC Editor: Please change this section to read as follows
   after the IANA action has been completed: "IANA has added a reference
   to this specification in the Text/Plain Media Type registration."

   IANA is requested to update the registration of the MIME Media type
   text/plain at http://www.iana.org/assignments/media-types/text/ with
   the fragment identifier defined in this memo by adding a reference to
   this memo (with the appropriate RFC number once it is known).





Wilde & Duerst          Expires February 11, 2008              [Page 12]

Internet-Draft       text/plain Fragment Identifiers         August 2007


7.  Security Considerations

   The fact that software implementing fragment identifiers for plain
   text and software not implementing them differs in behavior, and the
   fact that different software may show fragments to users in different
   ways, can lead to misunderstandings on the part of users.  Such
   misunderstandings might be exploited in a way similar to spoofing or
   phishing, although concrete examples of how this might be done are
   not currently known.

   Implementers and users of fragment identifiers for plain text should
   also be aware of the security considerations in RFC 3986 [4] and RFC
   3987 [9].


8.  Change Log

   Note to RFC Editor: Please remove this section before publication.

8.1.  From -07 to -08 (after IETF Last Call)

   o  Changed back 'number' rule from 0*(DIGIT) to 1*(DIGIT), because
      examples such as "#line=,1" are taken care of in the 'range'
      production.

8.2.  From -06 to -07 (addressing IETF Last Call Comments)

   o  Completely removed regular expressions to simplify
      implementations.

   o  Removed the possibility to combine multiple schemes.  As a result,
      fragments will always consist of consecutive characters.

   o  Changed "MacOS uses CR" to "MacOS traditionally used CR".

   o  Changed 'number' syntax rule from "number = 1*( DIGIT )" to
      "number = 0*( DIGIT )" to take into account examples such as
      "#line=,1".

   o  Added a sentence explaining that lengths are a weak but cheaply
      calculated hash function.

   o  Moved UTF-8 reference to non-normative.

   o  Moved ABNF from %xdd.dd... back to direct literals, stating that
      they are case-sensitive (see RFC 3862 for an example of this).





Wilde & Duerst          Expires February 11, 2008              [Page 13]

Internet-Draft       text/plain Fragment Identifiers         August 2007


   o  Changed StringWithEscapedSemicolon to
      <StringWithEscapedSemicolon>, and said that it must not be quoted.

   o  In "Clients SHOULD NOT make any attempt to correct or guess
      fragment identifiers.", changed "SHOULD NOT" to "MUST NOT".

   o  Removed some redundant normative text in Examples section.

   o  Added "Calculation of hash sums is done after stripping any
      potential content-encodings or content-transfer-encodings." to
      section on hash sums.

   o  Wording improvements and updates to Acknowledgements.

   o  Changed abstract for more clarity.

8.3.  From -05 to -06

   o  Clarified that this is intended as an update of the text/plain
      MIME type registration, in newly added IANA consideration section
      and elsewhere.

   o  Added normative reference to UTF-8 (STD63/RFC3629).

   o  Fixed section about non-ASCII characters in regular expressions to
      be more accurate re.  IRIs.

   o  Fixed some text about decomposition and Unicode.

   o  Clarified that UTF-16 can also use 4 octets per character.

   o  Changed ABNF to make sure schemes are case-sensitive (string
      literals in ABNF are case-insensitive).

   o  Used HEXDIG from RFC 4234, made clear DIGIT and HEXDIG are from
      that spec.

   o  Specified order of decoding the various escapings.

   o  Moved section on line endings to the back, and changed
      requirements to be more in line with practice.

   o  Added IANA Consideration section.

   o  Expanded Security Consideration section.

   o  Removed quote from RFC 3986, because the quoted text does not
      actually exist there anymore; changed text appropriately.



Wilde & Duerst          Expires February 11, 2008              [Page 14]

Internet-Draft       text/plain Fragment Identifiers         August 2007


   o  Reorganized section two to get rid of one section level.

   o  Added overview in introduction, and some glue text here and there.

   o  Changed to more IETF-like wording in some instances (e.g. intro to
      this section; removing "Compliant software MUST follow this
      specification." at the start of the Introduction,...).

   o  Removed 'where to send comments' section.

   o  Fixed wording is some cases, tried to make shorter sentences and
      eliminate parenthesized expressions.

   o  Removed acknowledgement for xml2rfc; we are nevertheless very
      grateful for this work!

8.4.  From -04 to -05

   o  Added some explanatory text to the last paragraph of Section 2.3.

   o  Added a paragraph about the importance of having fragment
      identification capabilities for out-of-line linking methods such
      as XLink to Section 1.3.

   o  Added explanation of why the charset is important for length hash
      sums to Section 3.1.

   o  Added text that makes hash sum handling optional and allows
      clients to interpret fragment identifiers even if the hash sum did
      not match (changed MUST NOT to SHOULD NOT) to Section 4.3.

   o  Added example using a length hash sum in Section 5.

   o  RFC 2234 (ABNF) has been obsoleted by [6].

   o  Removed the "Open Issues" section for preparation of final draft
      before submission as RFC.

8.5.  From -03 to -04

   o  URIs are now defined by RFC 3986 [4], so the text and the
      references have been updated.  In particular, RFC3986 defines a
      fragment identifier to be part of the URI, whereas in the
      obsoleted RFC 2396 URI specification, it was not part of a URI as
      such, but of a "URI reference".

   o  IRIs are now defined by RFC 3987 [9], so the text and the
      references have been updated.



Wilde & Duerst          Expires February 11, 2008              [Page 15]

Internet-Draft       text/plain Fragment Identifiers         August 2007


   o  Changed IPR clause from RFC 3667 to RFC 3978 (updated version of
      RFC 3667).

8.6.  From -02 to -03

   o  Replaced most occurrences of 'resource' with 'MIME entity',
      because the result of dereferencing a URI is not the resource
      itself, but some MIME entity (in our case of type text/plain)
      representing it.  Thanks to Sandro Hawke for pointing this out.

   o  Moved "Open Issues" to the very back of the document.

   o  Added Section 4 to define the processing model for fragment
      identifiers (moved Section 4.2 from Section 3 to Section 4).

   o  Added hash scheme to make fragment identifiers more robust
      (Section 2.3).

   o  Changed IPR clause from RFC 2026 to RFC 3667 (updated version of
      RFC 2026).

8.7.  From -01 to -02

   o  Fundamental change in semantics: counts turn into positions
      (between characters or lines), so in order to identify a character
      or line, ranges must be used (which now use positions to specify
      the upper and lower bounds of the range).

   o  Made the first value of a range optional as well, so that line=,5
      also is legal, identifying everything from the start of the MIME
      entity to the 5th line.

   o  Changed the syntax from parenthesis-style to a more traditional
      style using equals-signs.

8.8.  From -00 to -01

   o  Made the second count value of ranges optional, so that something
      like line(10,) is legal and properly defined.

   o  Added non-normative reference to Internet draft about non-ASCII
      characters in search strings.

   o  Added Section 1.4 about incremental deployment.

   o  Added more elaborate examples.





Wilde & Duerst          Expires February 11, 2008              [Page 16]

Internet-Draft       text/plain Fragment Identifiers         August 2007


   o  Added text about regex buffer overflow problems in Section 7.

   o  Added Section 4.1 about line endings in text/plain resources.

   o  Added "Open Issues" to collect open issues regarding this memo
      (will be deleted in final RFC text).


9.  References

9.1.  Normative References

   [1]   Freed, N. and N. Borenstein, "Multipurpose Internet Mail
         Extensions (MIME) Part Two: Media Types", RFC 2046,
         November 1996.

   [2]   Freed, N. and N. Borenstein, "Multipurpose Internet Mail
         Extensions (MIME) Part One: Format of Internet Message Bodies",
         RFC 2045, November 1996.

   [3]   Gellens, R., "The Text/Plain Format and DelSp Parameters",
         RFC 3676, February 2004.

   [4]   Berners-Lee, T., Fielding, R., and L. Masinter, "Uniform
         Resource Identifier (URI): Generic Syntax", RFC 3986,
         January 2005.

   [5]   Bradner, S., "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate Requirement
         Levels", RFC 2119, March 1997.

   [6]   Crocker, D. and P. Overell, "Augmented BNF for Syntax
         Specifications: ABNF", RFC 4234, October 2005.

   [7]   Freed, N. and J. Postel, "IANA Charset Registration
         Procedures", BCP 19, October 2000.

   [8]   Rivest, R., "The MD5 Message-Digest Algorithm", RFC 1321,
         April 1992.

   [9]   Duerst, M. and M. Suignard, "Internationalized Resource
         Identifiers (IRI)", RFC 3987, January 2005.

9.2.  Non-Normative References

   [10]  ANSI X3.4-1986, "Coded Character Set - 7-Bit American National
         Standard Code for Information Interchange", STD 63, RFC 3629,
         1992.




Wilde & Duerst          Expires February 11, 2008              [Page 17]

Internet-Draft       text/plain Fragment Identifiers         August 2007


   [11]  Yergeau, F., "UTF-8, a transformation format of ISO 10646",
         STD 63, RFC 3629, November 2003.

   [12]  Connolly, D. and L. Masinter, "The 'text/html' Media Type",
         RFC 2854, June 2000.

   [13]  Freed, N. and J. Klensin, "Media Type Specifications and
         Registration Procedures", RFC 4288, December 2005.

   [14]  DeRose, S., Maler, E., and D. Orchard, "XML Linking Language
         (XLink) Version 1.0", W3C Recommendation REC-xlink-20010627,
         June 2001.

   [15]  Hoffman, P. and F. Yergeau, "UTF-16, an encoding of ISO 10646",
         RFC 2781, February 2000.


Appendix A.  Acknowledgements

   Thanks for comments and suggestions provided by Marcel Baschnagel,
   Stephane Bortzmeyer, Tim Bray, John Cowan, Spencer Dawkins, Benja
   Fallenstein, Ted Hardie, Sandro Hawke, Jeffrey Hutzelman, Graham
   Klyne, Dan Kohn, Henrik Levkowetz, Mark Nottingham, and Conrad
   Parker.


Authors' Addresses

   Erik Wilde
   UC Berkeley
   School of Information, 311 South Hall
   Berkeley, CA 94720-4600
   U.S.A.

   Phone: +1-510-6432253
   Email: dret@berkeley.edu
   URI:   http://dret.net/netdret/














Wilde & Duerst          Expires February 11, 2008              [Page 18]

Internet-Draft       text/plain Fragment Identifiers         August 2007


   Martin Duerst (Note: Please write "Duerst" with u-umlaut wherever possible, for example as "D&#252;rst" in XML and HTML.)
   Aoyama Gakuin University
   5-10-1 Fuchinobe
   Sagamihara, Kanagawa  229-8558
   Japan

   Phone: +81 42 759 6329
   Fax:   +81 42 759 6495
   Email: mailto:duerst@it.aoyama.ac.jp
   URI:   http://www.sw.it.aoyama.ac.jp/D%C3%BCrst/









































Wilde & Duerst          Expires February 11, 2008              [Page 19]

Internet-Draft       text/plain Fragment Identifiers         August 2007


Full Copyright Statement

   Copyright (C) The IETF Trust (2007).

   This document is subject to the rights, licenses and restrictions
   contained in BCP 78, and except as set forth therein, the authors
   retain all their rights.

   This document and the information contained herein are provided on an
   "AS IS" basis and THE CONTRIBUTOR, THE ORGANIZATION HE/SHE REPRESENTS
   OR IS SPONSORED BY (IF ANY), THE INTERNET SOCIETY, THE IETF TRUST AND
   THE INTERNET ENGINEERING TASK FORCE DISCLAIM ALL WARRANTIES, EXPRESS
   OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF
   THE INFORMATION HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED
   WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.


Intellectual Property

   The IETF takes no position regarding the validity or scope of any
   Intellectual Property Rights or other rights that might be claimed to
   pertain to the implementation or use of the technology described in
   this document or the extent to which any license under such rights
   might or might not be available; nor does it represent that it has
   made any independent effort to identify any such rights.  Information
   on the procedures with respect to rights in RFC documents can be
   found in BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Copies of IPR disclosures made to the IETF Secretariat and any
   assurances of licenses to be made available, or the result of an
   attempt made to obtain a general license or permission for the use of
   such proprietary rights by implementers or users of this
   specification can be obtained from the IETF on-line IPR repository at
   http://www.ietf.org/ipr.

   The IETF invites any interested party to bring to its attention any
   copyrights, patents or patent applications, or other proprietary
   rights that may cover technology that may be required to implement
   this standard.  Please address the information to the IETF at
   ietf-ipr@ietf.org.


Acknowledgment

   Funding for the RFC Editor function is provided by the IETF
   Administrative Support Activity (IASA).





Wilde & Duerst          Expires February 11, 2008              [Page 20]


