


Network Working Group                                           E. Wilde
Internet-Draft                                Swiss Federal Institute of
Expires: July 23, 2002                                        Technology
                                                          A. Vaha-Sipila
                                                                   Nokia
                                                        January 22, 2002


                URI scheme for GSM Short Message Service
                         draft-wilde-sms-uri-00

Status of this Memo

   This document is an Internet-Draft and is in full conformance with
   all provisions of Section 10 of RFC2026.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that
   other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
   Drafts.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at http://
   www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt.

   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.

   This Internet-Draft will expire on July 23, 2002.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2002).  All Rights Reserved.

Abstract

   This memo specifies a URI (Universal Resource Identifier) scheme
   "sms" for specifying a recipient (and optionally a gateway) for an
   SMS message.  SMS messages are two-way paging messages that can be
   sent from and received by a mobile phone or a suitably equipped
   computer.







Wilde & Vaha-Sipila       Expires July 23, 2002                 [Page 1]

Internet-Draft    URI scheme for GSM Short Message Service  January 2002


Table of Contents

   1.    Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  3
   1.1   The Short Message Service  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  3
   1.2   Universal Resource Identifiers . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  3
   1.3   SMS Messages and the Internet  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  3
   1.3.1 SMS Messages and the Web . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  4
   1.3.2 SMS Messages and Forms . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  4
   2.    The "sms" URI Scheme . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  5
   2.1   Applicability  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  5
   2.2   Formal Definition  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  6
   2.3   Parsing an "sms" URI . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  6
   2.4   Examples of Use  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  7
   2.5   Using "sms" URIs in HTML Forms . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  7
   3.    Security Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  8
   4.    Change Log . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  8
         Normative References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  9
         Non-Normative References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  9
         Authors' Addresses . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
   A.    Where to send Comments . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
   B.    Acknowledgements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
         Full Copyright Statement . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11





























Wilde & Vaha-Sipila       Expires July 23, 2002                 [Page 2]

Internet-Draft    URI scheme for GSM Short Message Service  January 2002


1. Introduction

   Compliant software MUST follow this specification.  The capitalized
   key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT",
   "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED",  "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this
   document are to be interpreted as described in RFC 2119 [RFC2119].

1.1 The Short Message Service

   The Short Message Service (SMS) [SMS] is a rather simple service for
   sending messages between SMS clients or, using so-called "Telematic
   Interworking", from an SMS client through a gateway to a receiver
   using a different service, such as fax or email.  The SMS service is
   described in more detail in the SMS service registration memo [draft-
   wilde-sms-service-01].

1.2 Universal Resource Identifiers

   One of the core specifications for identifying resources on the
   Internet is RFC 2396 [RFC2396], specifying the syntax and semantics
   of a Universal Resource Identifier (URI).  The most important notion
   of URIs are "schemes", which define a framework within which
   resources can be identified (and possibly accessed).  URIs enable
   users to identify resources, and are used for very diverse schemes
   such as access protocols (HTTP, FTP), broadcast media (TV channels
   [RFC2838]), messaging (email [RFC2368]), or even telephone numbers
   (voice [RFC2806]).

   URIs often are mentioned together with Universal Resource Names
   (URNs) and/or Uniform Resource Locators (URLs), and it often is
   unclear how to separate these concepts.  For the purpose of this
   memo, only the term URI will be used, referring to the most
   fundamental concept.  The World Wide Web Consortium (W3C) has issued
   a note [uriclarify] discussing the topic of URIs, URNs, and URLs in
   detail.

1.3 SMS Messages and the Internet

   One of the important reasons for the universal access of the Web is
   the ability to access all information through a unique interface.
   This kind of integration makes it easy to provide information as well
   as to consume it.  One aspect of this integration is the support of
   user agents (in the case of the Web, commonly referred to as
   browsers) for multiple content formats (such as HTML, GIF, JPEG) and
   access schemes (such as HTTP, HTTP-S, FTP).

   The "mailto" scheme has proven to be very useful and popular, because
   most user agents support it by providing an email composition



Wilde & Vaha-Sipila       Expires July 23, 2002                 [Page 3]

Internet-Draft    URI scheme for GSM Short Message Service  January 2002


   facility when the user activates (eg, clicks on) the URI.
   Accordingly, the "sms" scheme could be supported by user agents by
   providing an SMS message composition facility when the user activates
   the URI.  Alternatively, in cases where the user agent does not
   provide a built-in SMS message composition facility, the scheme could
   still be supported by opening a Web page which provides such a
   service.  The specific Web page to be used could be configured by the
   user, so that each user could use the SMS message composition service
   of his choice.

   This goal of this memo is to specify the "sms" URI scheme, so that
   user agents (such as Web browsers and email clients) could start to
   support it.

1.3.1 SMS Messages and the Web

   SMS messages can provide an alternative to a "mailto" URIs [RFC2368],
   or "tel" or "fax" URIs [RFC2806].  When a "sms" URI is activated, the
   user agent MAY start a program for sending an SMS message, just as
   "mailto" may open a mail client.  Unfortunately, most browsers do not
   support the external handling of internally unsupported URI schemes
   in the same generalized way as most of them support external handling
   of additional MIME type content for types which they do not support
   internally.  Ideally, user agents should implement generic URI
   parsers and provide a way to associate unsupported schemes with
   external applications (or Web services).

   The recipient of an SMS message need not be a mobile phone.  It can
   be a server that can process SMS messages, either by gatewaying them
   to another messaging system (such as regular electronic mail), or by
   parsing them for supplementary services.

   SMS messages can be used to transport almost any kind of data (even
   though there is a very tight size limit), but the only standardized
   data formats are character-based messages in different character
   encodings.  SMS messages have a maximum length of 160 characters
   (when using 7-bit characters from the SMS character set), or 140
   octets.  However, SMS messages can be concatenated to form longer
   messages.  It is up to the user agent to decide whether to limit the
   length of the message, and how to indicate this limit in its user
   interface, if necessary.  There is one exception to this, see Section
   2.5.

1.3.2 SMS Messages and Forms

   The Hypertext Markup Language (HTML) [HTML401] provides a way to
   collect information from a user and pass it to a server for
   processing.  This functionality is known as "HTML forms".  A filled-



Wilde & Vaha-Sipila       Expires July 23, 2002                 [Page 4]

Internet-Draft    URI scheme for GSM Short Message Service  January 2002


   in form is usually sent to the destination using the Hypertext
   Transfer Protocol (HTTP) or email.  However, SMS messages can also be
   used as the transport mechanism for these forms.  As SMS transport is
   "out-of-band" as far as normal HTTP over TCP/IP is concerned, this
   provides a way to fill in forms offline, and send the data without
   making a TCP connection to the server, as the set-up time, cost, and
   overhead for a TCP connection are large compared to an SMS message.
   Also, depending on the network configuration, the sender's telephone
   number may be included in the SMS message, thus providing a weak form
   of authentication.

2. The "sms" URI Scheme

   Syntax definitions are given using the Augmented BNF for Syntax
   Specifications [RFC2234].

2.1 Applicability

   This URI scheme is intended for sending an SMS message to a certain
   recipient(s).  The functionality is quite similar to that of the
   "mailto" URL, which (as per RFC 2368 [RFC2368]) can also be used with
   a comma-separated list of email addresses.

   In some situations, it may be necessary to guide the sender to send
   the SMS message via a certain SMSC.  For this purpose, the URI may
   specify the number of the SMSC.

   SMS messages may be sent through gateways to other services.  These
   gateways are operated inside SMS centers.  An "SMS" URI may specify
   that a certain gateway should be used.

   The notation for phone numbers is taken from [draft-allocchio-gstn-
   01].  Refer to this document for information on why this particular
   format was chosen.

   How the SMS message is sent to the SMSC is outside the scope of this
   specification.  SMS messages can be sent over the GSM air interface,
   by using a modem and a suitable protocol, or by accessing services
   over other protocols, such as a Web service for sending SMS messages.
   Also, SMS message service options like deferred delivery and delivery
   notification requests are not in the scope of this document.  Such
   services MAY be requested from the network by the user agent if
   necessary.

   SMS messages sent as a result of this URI MUST be sent as class 1 SMS
   messages, if the user agent is able to specify the message class.





Wilde & Vaha-Sipila       Expires July 23, 2002                 [Page 5]

Internet-Draft    URI scheme for GSM Short Message Service  January 2002


2.2 Formal Definition

   The URI is case-insensitive.  The syntax of an "sms" URI is formally
   described as follows, where the base syntax is taken from RFC 2396
   [RFC2396]:


   sms-uri               =  scheme ":" scheme-specific-part
   scheme                =  "sms"
   scheme-specific-part  =  1*( sms-recipient )
   sms-recipient         =  gstn-phone sms-qualifier
                            [ "," sms-recipient ]
   sms-qualifier         =  *( smsc-qualifier / pid-qualifier )
   smsc-qualifier        =  ";smsc=" SMSC-sub-addr
   pid-qualifier         =  ";pid=" PID-sub-addr

   The syntax definition for "global-phone" is taken from [draft-
   allocchio-gstn-01], allowing global as well as local telephone
   numbers.

   The syntax definition for "SMSC-sub-addr" and "PID-sub-addr" is
   derived from [draft-wilde-sms-service-01], please refer to that
   document for the syntax of the qualifier values.

   It should be noted that both the SMSC as well as the PID qualifier
   may appear only once per sms-recipient.  If multiple qualifiers are
   present, conforming software MUST interpret the first occurrence and
   ignore all other occurrences.

2.3 Parsing an "sms" URI

   The following list describes the steps for processing an "sms" URI:

   1.  The "gstn-phone" of the first "sms-recipient" is extracted.  It
       is the phone number of the final recipient and it MUST be written
       in international form with country code, unless the number only
       works from inside a certain geographical area or a network.  Note
       that some numbers may work from several networks but not from the
       whole world - these SHOULD be written in international form.
       According to [draft-allocchio-gstn-01], all international numbers
       MUST begin with a "+" character.  Hyphens and dots are only to
       aid readability.  They MUST NOT have any other meaning.

   2.  The "smsc-qualifier" of the first "sms-recipient" is extracted,
       if present.

   3.  The "pid-qualifier" of the first "sms-recipient" is extracted, if
       present.



Wilde & Vaha-Sipila       Expires July 23, 2002                 [Page 6]

Internet-Draft    URI scheme for GSM Short Message Service  January 2002


   4.  The user agent should provide some means for message composition,
       either by implementing this itself, or by accessing a service
       providing it.  If the "pid-qualifier" is set to "pid=SMTP:...",
       then the user agents must make sure that the email address is
       correctly set (as defined by the SMS specification [SMS]) in the
       message being composed.

   5.  After message composition, a user agent SHOULD try to send the
       message first using the SMSC set in the "smsc-qualifier" (if
       present).  If that fails, the user agent MAY try another SMSC.

   6.  If the URI consists of a comma-separated list of recipients (ie,
       contains multiple "sms-recipient" parts), all of them are
       processed in this manner.  Exactly the same message SHOULD be
       sent to all of the listed recipients.


2.4 Examples of Use

   sms:+41796431851

   This indicates an SMS message capable recipient at the given
   telephone number.  The message is sent using the user agent's default
   SMSC.

   sms:+41796431851;via=+41794999000

   This indicates that the SMS message should be sent using the SMSC at
   the given number.

   sms:+41796431851,+4116321035;pid=fax

   This URI should result in two SMS messages being sent, one to the
   recipient number as shown in the example above, the other one being
   sent as a fax to the second number.

   sms:+41796431851;pid=smtp:ietf@dret.net

   In this case, a message will be sent via SMS using the SMS to email
   functionality in the SMSC, so that it will eventually result in an
   email being sent to the specified email address.  In this case, the
   phone number will not be interpreted.

2.5 Using "sms" URIs in HTML Forms

   When using a "sms" type URI as an action URI for HTML form submission
   [HTML401], the form contents MUST be packaged in the SMS message just
   as they are packaged when using a "mailto" URL [RFC2368], using the



Wilde & Vaha-Sipila       Expires July 23, 2002                 [Page 7]

Internet-Draft    URI scheme for GSM Short Message Service  January 2002


   "application/x-www-form-urlencoded" MIME type, effectively packaging
   all form data into URI compliant syntax [RFC2396].  The SMS message
   MUST NOT contain any HTTP headers, only the form data.  The MIME type
   is implicit.  It MUST NOT be transferred in the SMS message.

   The user agent SHOULD inform the user about the possible security
   hazards involved when submitting the form (it is probably being sent
   as plain text over an air interface).

   If the form submission is longer than the maximum SMS message size,
   the user agent MAY either concatenate SMS messages, if it is able to
   do so, or it MAY refuse to send the message.  The user agent MUST NOT
   send out partial form submissions.

3. Security Considerations

   The "Security Considerations" section of the SMS service registration
   memo [draft-wilde-sms-service-01] MUST be consulted.

   A user agent SHOULD NOT send out SMS messages without the knowledge
   of the user, because of associated risks, which include sending
   masses of SMS messages to a subscriber without his consent, and the
   costs involved in sending an SMS message.

   The user agent SHOULD have some mechanism that the user can use to
   filter out unwanted destinations for SMS messages.  The user agent
   SHOULD also have some means of restricting the number of SMS messages
   being sent as the result of activating one "sms" URI.

   If an "sms" URI contains a "PID" qualifier and the user agent
   supports the qualifier and its value, then the user agent MUST set
   the SMS message's PID as specified by the qualifier.  User agents MAY
   inform users about the value and the functional consequences of PID
   qualifiers (eg, by notifying users that sending the SMS effectively
   will result in a fax message being delivered, rather than an SMS
   message).

   The Telematic Interworking functionality of the SMSC addressed by the
   "PID" qualifier is not necessarily implemented by the SMSC being
   used, and SMSC providers are known for not or not correctly
   supporting some or all "PID" qualifier values.  User agents SHOULD
   take into account that the success rate of SMS messages being sent
   using "PID" qualifiers is lower than that of "plain" SMS messages.

4. Change Log

   none so far (first draft)




Wilde & Vaha-Sipila       Expires July 23, 2002                 [Page 8]

Internet-Draft    URI scheme for GSM Short Message Service  January 2002


Normative References

   [HTML401]                     Raggett, D., Le Hors, A. and I. Jacobs,
                                 "HTML 4.01 Specification", W3C REC-
                                 html401, December 1999, <http://
                                 www.w3.org/TR/html401/>.

   [RFC2119]                     Bradner, S., "Key words for use in RFCs
                                 to Indicate Requirement Levels", RFC
                                 2119, March 1997.

   [RFC2234]                     Crocker, D. and P. Overell, "Augmented
                                 BNF for Syntax Specifications: ABNF",
                                 RFC 2234, November 1997.

   [RFC2396]                     Berners-Lee, T., Fielding, R. and L.
                                 Masinter, "Uniform Resource Identifiers
                                 (URI): Generic Syntax", RFC 2396,
                                 August 1998.

   [SMS]                         European Telecommunications Standards
                                 Institute, "Digital Cellular
                                 Telecommunications System (Phase 2+);
                                 Technical realization of the Short
                                 Message Service (SMS); Point-to-Point
                                 (PP)", December 1998, <http://
                                 pda.etsi.org/pda/home.asp?wki_id=6822>.

   [draft-allocchio-gstn-01]     Allocchio, C., "Text string notation
                                 for Dial Sequences and GSTN / E.164
                                 addresses", draft-allocchio-gstn-01
                                 (work in progress), November 2001.

   [draft-wilde-sms-service-01]  Wilde, E., "Registration of GSTN SMS
                                 Service Qualifier", draft-wilde-sms-
                                 service-01 (work in progress), January
                                 2002.

Non-Normative References

   [RFC2368]     Hoffmann, P., Masinter, L. and J. Zawinski, "The mailto
                 URL scheme", RFC 2368, June 1998.

   [RFC2629]     Rose, M., "Writing I-Ds and RFCs using XML", RFC 2629,
                 June 1999.

   [RFC2806]     Vaha-Sipila, A., "URLs for Telephone Calls", RFC 2806,
                 April 2000.



Wilde & Vaha-Sipila       Expires July 23, 2002                 [Page 9]

Internet-Draft    URI scheme for GSM Short Message Service  January 2002


   [RFC2838]     Zigmond, D. and M. Vickers, "Uniform Resource
                 Identifiers for Television Broadcasts", RFC 2838, May
                 2000.

   [uriclarify]  World Wide Web Consortium, "URIs, URLs, and URNs:
                 Clarifications and Recommendations 1.0", W3C uri-
                 clarification , September 2001, <http://www.w3.org/TR/
                 uri-clarification/>.


Authors' Addresses

   Erik Wilde
   Swiss Federal Institute of Technology
   ETH-Zentrum
   8092 Zurich
   Switzerland

   Phone: +41-1-6325132
   EMail: ietf@dret.net
   URI:   http://dret.net/netdret/


   Antti Vaha-Sipila
   Nokia

   EMail: antti.vaha-sipila@nokia.com

Appendix A. Where to send Comments

   Please send all comments about this document to Erik Wilde.

Appendix B. Acknowledgements

   This document has been written using the IETF document DTD described
   in RFC 2629 [RFC2629].

   Thanks to Claudio Allocchio for his comments.













Wilde & Vaha-Sipila       Expires July 23, 2002                [Page 10]

Internet-Draft    URI scheme for GSM Short Message Service  January 2002


Full Copyright Statement

   Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2002).  All Rights Reserved.

   This document and translations of it may be copied and furnished to
   others, and derivative works that comment on or otherwise explain it
   or assist in its implementation may be prepared, copied, published
   and distributed, in whole or in part, without restriction of any
   kind, provided that the above copyright notice and this paragraph are
   included on all such copies and derivative works.  However, this
   document itself may not be modified in any way, such as by removing
   the copyright notice or references to the Internet Society or other
   Internet organizations, except as needed for the purpose of
   developing Internet standards in which case the procedures for
   copyrights defined in the Internet Standards process must be
   followed, or as required to translate it into languages other than
   English.

   The limited permissions granted above are perpetual and will not be
   revoked by the Internet Society or its successors or assigns.

   This document and the information contained herein is provided on an
   "AS IS" basis and THE INTERNET SOCIETY AND THE INTERNET ENGINEERING
   TASK FORCE DISCLAIMS ALL WARRANTIES, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING
   BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF THE INFORMATION
   HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF
   MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.

Acknowledgement

   Funding for the RFC Editor function is currently provided by the
   Internet Society.



















Wilde & Vaha-Sipila       Expires July 23, 2002                [Page 11]


