


Network Working Group                                           E. Wilde
Internet-Draft                                Swiss Federal Institute of
Expires: October 15, 2002                                     Technology
                                                          A. Vaha-Sipila
                                                                   Nokia
                                                          April 16, 2002


                URI scheme for GSM Short Message Service
                         draft-wilde-sms-uri-03

Status of this Memo

   This document is an Internet-Draft and is in full conformance with
   all provisions of Section 10 of RFC2026.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that
   other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
   Drafts.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at http://
   www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt.

   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.

   This Internet-Draft will expire on October 15, 2002.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2002).  All Rights Reserved.

Abstract

   This memo specifies a URI (Universal Resource Identifier) scheme
   "sms" for specifying a recipient (and optionally a gateway) for an
   SMS message.  SMS messages are two-way paging messages that can be
   sent from and received by a mobile phone or a suitably equipped
   computer.







Wilde & Vaha-Sipila     Expires October 15, 2002                [Page 1]

Internet-Draft    URI scheme for GSM Short Message Service    April 2002


Table of Contents

   1.    Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  3
   1.1   The Short Message Service  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  3
   1.2   Universal Resource Identifiers . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  3
   1.3   SMS Messages and the Internet  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  3
   1.3.1 SMS Messages and the Web . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  4
   1.3.2 SMS Messages and Forms . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  5
   2.    The "sms" URI Scheme . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  5
   2.1   Applicability  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  5
   2.2   Formal Definition  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  6
   2.3   Parsing an "sms" URI . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  6
   2.4   Examples of Use  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  7
   2.5   Using "sms" URIs in HTML Forms . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  8
   3.    "sms" URIs and SMS Web Services  . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  8
   3.1   Example  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  9
   4.    Security Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
   5.    Change Log . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
   5.1   From -00 to -01  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
   5.2   From -01 to -02  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11
   5.3   From -02 to -03  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11
         Normative References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11
         Non-Normative References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
         Authors' Addresses . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
   A.    Where to send Comments . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
   B.    Acknowledgements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
         Full Copyright Statement . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14
























Wilde & Vaha-Sipila     Expires October 15, 2002                [Page 2]

Internet-Draft    URI scheme for GSM Short Message Service    April 2002


1. Introduction

   Compliant software MUST follow this specification.  The capitalized
   key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT",
   "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED",  "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this
   document are to be interpreted as described in RFC 2119 [RFC2119].

1.1 The Short Message Service

   The Short Message Service (SMS) [SMS] is a rather simple service for
   sending messages between SMS clients or, using so-called "Telematic
   Interworking", from an SMS client through a gateway to a receiver
   using a different service, such as fax or email.  The SMS service is
   described in more detail in the SMS service registration memo [draft-
   wilde-sms-service-03].

1.2 Universal Resource Identifiers

   One of the core specifications for identifying resources on the
   Internet is RFC 2396 [RFC2396], specifying the syntax and semantics
   of a Universal Resource Identifier (URI).  The most important notion
   of URIs are "schemes", which define a framework within which
   resources can be identified (and possibly accessed).  URIs enable
   users to identify resources, and are used for very diverse schemes
   such as access protocols (HTTP, FTP), broadcast media (TV channels
   [RFC2838]), messaging (email [RFC2368]), or even telephone numbers
   (voice [RFC2806]).

   URIs often are mentioned together with Universal Resource Names
   (URNs) and/or Uniform Resource Locators (URLs), and it often is
   unclear how to separate these concepts.  For the purpose of this
   memo, only the term URI will be used, referring to the most
   fundamental concept.  The World Wide Web Consortium (W3C) has issued
   a note [uri-clarification] discussing the topic of URIs, URNs, and
   URLs in detail.

1.3 SMS Messages and the Internet

   One of the important reasons for the universal access of the Web is
   the ability to access all information through a unique interface.
   This kind of integration makes it easy to provide information as well
   as to consume it.  One aspect of this integration is the support of
   user agents (in the case of the Web, commonly referred to as
   browsers) for multiple content formats (such as HTML, GIF, JPEG) and
   access schemes (such as HTTP, HTTP-S, FTP).

   The "mailto" scheme has proven to be very useful and popular, because
   most user agents support it by providing an email composition



Wilde & Vaha-Sipila     Expires October 15, 2002                [Page 3]

Internet-Draft    URI scheme for GSM Short Message Service    April 2002


   facility when the user activates (eg, clicks on) the URI.
   Accordingly, the "sms" scheme could be supported by user agents by
   providing an SMS message composition facility when the user activates
   the URI.  Alternatively, in cases where the user agent does not
   provide a built-in SMS message composition facility, the scheme could
   still be supported by opening a Web page which provides such a
   service.  The specific Web page to be used could be configured by the
   user, so that each user could use the SMS message composition service
   of his choice.

   The goal of this memo is to specify the "sms" URI scheme, so that
   user agents (such as Web browsers and email clients) could start to
   support it.  The "sms" URI scheme identifies SMS message endpoints as
   resources.  When "sms" URIs are dereferenced, implementations MAY
   create a message and present it to be edited before being sent, or
   they MAY use additional services to provide the functionality
   necessary for composing a message and sending it to the SMS message
   endpoint.

1.3.1 SMS Messages and the Web

   SMS messages can provide an alternative to a "mailto" URIs [RFC2368],
   or "tel" or "fax" URIs [RFC2806].  When a "sms" URI is activated, the
   user agent MAY start a program for sending an SMS message, just as
   "mailto" may open a mail client.  Unfortunately, most browsers do not
   support the external handling of internally unsupported URI schemes
   in the same generalized way as most of them support external handling
   of additional MIME type content for types which they do not support
   internally.  Ideally, user agents should implement generic URI
   parsers and provide a way to associate unsupported schemes with
   external applications (or Web services).

   The recipient of an SMS message need not be a mobile phone.  It can
   be a server that can process SMS messages, either by gatewaying them
   to another messaging system (such as regular electronic mail), or by
   parsing them for supplementary services.

   SMS messages can be used to transport almost any kind of data (even
   though there is a very tight size limit), but the only standardized
   data formats are character-based messages in different character
   encodings.  SMS messages have a maximum length of 160 characters
   (when using 7-bit characters from the SMS character set), or 140
   octets.  However, SMS messages can be concatenated to form longer
   messages.  It is up to the user agent to decide whether to limit the
   length of the message, and how to indicate this limit in its user
   interface, if necessary.  There is one exception to this, see Section
   2.5.




Wilde & Vaha-Sipila     Expires October 15, 2002                [Page 4]

Internet-Draft    URI scheme for GSM Short Message Service    April 2002


1.3.2 SMS Messages and Forms

   The Hypertext Markup Language (HTML) [HTML401] provides a way to
   collect information from a user and pass it to a server for
   processing.  This functionality is known as "HTML forms".  A filled-
   in form is usually sent to the destination using the Hypertext
   Transfer Protocol (HTTP) or email.  However, SMS messages can also be
   used as the transport mechanism for these forms.  As SMS transport is
   "out-of-band" as far as normal HTTP over TCP/IP is concerned, this
   provides a way to fill in forms offline, and send the data without
   making a TCP connection to the server, as the set-up time, cost, and
   overhead for a TCP connection are large compared to an SMS message.
   Also, depending on the network configuration, the sender's telephone
   number may be included in the SMS message, thus providing a weak form
   of authentication.

2. The "sms" URI Scheme

   Syntax definitions are given using the Augmented BNF for Syntax
   Specifications [RFC2234].

2.1 Applicability

   This URI scheme is intended for sending an SMS message to a certain
   recipient(s).  The functionality is quite similar to that of the
   "mailto" URL, which (as per RFC 2368 [RFC2368]) can also be used with
   a comma-separated list of email addresses.

   In some situations, it may be necessary to guide the sender to send
   the SMS message via a certain SMSC.  For this purpose, the URI may
   specify the number of the SMSC.

   SMS messages may be sent through gateways to other services.  These
   gateways are operated inside SMS centers.  An "SMS" URI may specify
   that a certain gateway should be used.

   The notation for phone numbers is taken from [draft-allocchio-gstn-
   03].  Refer to this document for information on why this particular
   format was chosen.

   How the SMS message is sent to the SMSC is outside the scope of this
   specification.  SMS messages can be sent over the GSM air interface,
   by using a modem and a suitable protocol, or by accessing services
   over other protocols, such as a Web service for sending SMS messages.
   Also, SMS message service options like deferred delivery and delivery
   notification requests are not in the scope of this document.  Such
   services MAY be requested from the network by the user agent if
   necessary.



Wilde & Vaha-Sipila     Expires October 15, 2002                [Page 5]

Internet-Draft    URI scheme for GSM Short Message Service    April 2002


   SMS messages sent as a result of this URI MUST be sent as class 1 SMS
   messages, if the user agent is able to specify the message class.

2.2 Formal Definition

   The URI scheme's keywords specified in the following syntax
   description are case-insensitive.  The syntax of an "sms" URI is
   formally described as follows, where the base syntax is taken from
   RFC 2396 [RFC2396]:


   sms-uri               =  scheme ":" scheme-specific-part
   scheme                =  "sms"
   scheme-specific-part  =  1*( sms-recipient ) [ sms-body ]
   sms-recipient         =  gstn-phone sms-qualifier
                            [ "," sms-recipient ]
   sms-qualifier         =  *( smsc-qualifier / pid-qualifier )
   smsc-qualifier        =  ";smsc=" SMSC-sub-addr
   pid-qualifier         =  ";pid=" PID-sub-addr
   sms-body              =  "?body=" *urlc

   The syntax definition for "gstn-phone" is taken from [draft-
   allocchio-gstn-03], allowing global as well as local telephone
   numbers.

   The syntax definition for "SMSC-sub-addr" and "PID-sub-addr" is
   derived from [draft-wilde-sms-service-03], please refer to that
   document for the syntax of the qualifier values.

   The "sms-body" is used to define the body of the SMS message to be
   composed.  It consists of URL-encoded UTF-8 characters.
   Implementations MUST make sure that the sms-body characters are
   converted to a suitable character encoding before sending, the most
   popular being the 7-bit SMS character encoding, another variant
   (though not as universally supported as 7-bit SMS) is the UCS-2
   character encoding  (both specified in [SMS-CHAR]).  Implementations
   MAY choose to silently discard (or convert) characters in the sms-
   body that are not supported by the SMS character set they are using
   to send the SMS message.

   It should be noted that both the SMSC as well as the PID qualifier
   may appear only once per sms-recipient.  If multiple qualifiers are
   present, conforming software MUST interpret the first occurrence and
   ignore all other occurrences.

2.3 Parsing an "sms" URI

   The following list describes the steps for processing an "sms" URI:



Wilde & Vaha-Sipila     Expires October 15, 2002                [Page 6]

Internet-Draft    URI scheme for GSM Short Message Service    April 2002


   1.  The "gstn-phone" of the first "sms-recipient" is extracted.  It
       is the phone number of the final recipient and it MUST be written
       in international form with country code, unless the number only
       works from inside a certain geographical area or a network.  Note
       that some numbers may work from several networks but not from the
       whole world - these SHOULD be written in international form.
       According to [draft-allocchio-gstn-03], all international numbers
       MUST begin with a "+" character.  Hyphens and dots are only to
       aid readability.  They MUST NOT have any other meaning.

   2.  The "smsc-qualifier" of the first "sms-recipient" is extracted,
       if present.

   3.  The "pid-qualifier" of the first "sms-recipient" is extracted, if
       present.

   4.  The "sms-body" is extracted, if present.

   5.  The user agent should provide some means for message composition,
       either by implementing this itself, or by accessing a service
       providing it.  Message composition SHOULD start with the body
       extracted from the "sms-body", if present.  If the "pid-
       qualifier" is set to "pid=SMTP:...", then the user agents must
       make sure that the email address is correctly set (as defined by
       the SMS specification [SMS]) in the message being composed.

   6.  After message composition, a user agent SHOULD try to send the
       message first using the SMSC set in the "smsc-qualifier" (if
       present).  If that fails, the user agent MAY try another SMSC.

   7.  If the URI consists of a comma-separated list of recipients (ie,
       contains multiple "sms-recipient" parts), all of them are
       processed in this manner.  Exactly the same message SHOULD be
       sent to all of the listed recipients.


2.4 Examples of Use

   sms:+41796431851

   This indicates an SMS message capable recipient at the given
   telephone number.  The message is sent using the user agent's default
   SMSC.

   sms:+41796431851;smsc=+41794999000

   This indicates that the SMS message should be sent using the SMSC at
   the given number.



Wilde & Vaha-Sipila     Expires October 15, 2002                [Page 7]

Internet-Draft    URI scheme for GSM Short Message Service    April 2002


   sms:+41796431851,+4116321035;pid=fax

   This URI should result in two SMS messages being sent, one to the
   recipient number as shown in the example above, the other one being
   sent as a fax to the second number (the fax is sent by the SMSC
   performing the gatewaying, not by the user agent).

   sms:+41796431851;pid=smtp:ietf@dret.net?body=hello%20there

   In this case, a message (initially being set to "hello there", which
   may have been modified by the user before sending) will be sent via
   SMS using the SMS to email functionality in the SMSC, so that it will
   eventually result in an email being sent to the specified email
   address.  In this case, the phone number will not be interpreted.

2.5 Using "sms" URIs in HTML Forms

   When using a "sms" type URI as an action URI for HTML form submission
   [HTML401], the form contents MUST be packaged in the SMS message just
   as they are packaged when using a "mailto" URL [RFC2368], using the
   "application/x-www-form-urlencoded" MIME type, effectively packaging
   all form data into URI compliant syntax [RFC2396].  The SMS message
   MUST NOT contain any HTTP headers, only the form data.  The MIME type
   is implicit.  It MUST NOT be transferred in the SMS message.

   The character encoding used for form submissions MUST be UTF-8
   [RFC2279].  It should be noted, however, that user agents MUST URL-
   encode form submissions before sending them.

   The user agent SHOULD inform the user about the possible security
   hazards involved when submitting the form (it is probably being sent
   as plain text over an air interface).

   If the form submission is longer than the maximum SMS message size,
   the user agent MAY either concatenate SMS messages, if it is able to
   do so, or it MAY refuse to send the message.  The user agent MUST NOT
   send out partial form submissions.

   Form submission via an "sms" URI can be combined with Telematic
   Interworking to result in form submissions being submitted via an SMS
   message and finally being sent to an email account.  In this case,
   all provisions for using the email "pid-qualifier" and using "sms"
   URIs with HTML forms must be followed.

3. "sms" URIs and SMS Web Services

   In many cases, user agents will not be able to directly compose and
   send SMS messages (because this requires that such a service is



Wilde & Vaha-Sipila     Expires October 15, 2002                [Page 8]

Internet-Draft    URI scheme for GSM Short Message Service    April 2002


   accessible to the system the user agent is running on).  However, it
   is likely that the user has access to a Web service that provides an
   SMS service, such as a Web site offering form-based SMS composition.
   Ideally, the user agent should access this Web service when
   activating an "sms" URI, thus enabling the user to use the Web
   service.

   One problem with this approach is that the Web service should somehow
   get the "sms" URI, in order interpret it and set the required
   parameters (such as the receiver's phone number).  The easiest way to
   implement this is for the user agent to add the "sms" URI as query
   string to the Web service's URI.  Consequently, user agents
   supporting SMS Web services identified by URIs SHOULD append the
   "sms" URI as query string to the Web services URI when accessing the
   Web service.  Web services providing SMS composition facilities
   SHOULD expect to receive an "sms" URI as query string and should
   process it as described by this memo.  This method only can be
   applied for Web service URIs which permit query strings (such as
   "http" and "https" URIs).  For other Web service URIs (such as "ftp"
   and "mailto"), user agents as well as Web services MUST NOT use the
   query string.

   It should be noted that RFC 2396 [RFC2396] defines that within query
   strings, the characters ";", "/", "?", ":", "@", "&", "=", "+", ",",
   and "$" are reserved.  It is therefore necessary to encode the "sms"
   URI accordingly before appending it as query string.

3.1 Example

   A document contains this piece of (X)HTML:

   <a href="sms:+41796431851">Send me an SMS!</a>

   The user agent interpreting this document does not internally support
   SMS message composition, but has configured to access a Web service
   for handling "sms" URIs.  This Web service has the following URI:

   http://sms.example.com/sms-form

   When the user activates the "sms" URI (eg, by clicking on the text
   "Send me an SMS!"), the user agents acts as if the activated URI had
   been:

   http://sms.example.com/sms-form?sms%3A%2B41796431851

   The Web service is then responsible for parsing the query string and
   providing an approriate interface, for example by already filling in
   the recipient address with the number provided in the "sms" URI.



Wilde & Vaha-Sipila     Expires October 15, 2002                [Page 9]

Internet-Draft    URI scheme for GSM Short Message Service    April 2002


4. Security Considerations

   The "Security Considerations" section of the SMS service registration
   memo [draft-wilde-sms-service-03] MUST be consulted.

   A user agent SHOULD NOT send out SMS messages without the knowledge
   of the user, because of associated risks, which include sending
   masses of SMS messages to a subscriber without his consent, and the
   costs involved in sending an SMS message.

   The user agent SHOULD have some mechanism that the user can use to
   filter out unwanted destinations for SMS messages.  The user agent
   SHOULD also have some means of restricting the number of SMS messages
   being sent as the result of activating one "sms" URI.

   If an "sms" URI contains a pid-qualifier and the user agent supports
   the qualifier and its value, then the user agent MUST set the SMS
   message's PID as specified by the qualifier.  User agents MAY inform
   users about the value and the functional consequences of PID
   qualifiers (eg, by notifying users that sending the SMS effectively
   will result in a fax message being delivered, rather than an SMS
   message).

   The method described in section Section 3 adds another level of
   indirection to the handling of "sms" URIs.  If this method is
   combined with the pid-qualifier gateway functionality, SMS
   composition and reception will probably be distributed over three
   different protocols (the Web service, SMS transport itself, and the
   service selected by the pid-qualifier).  User agent SHOULD make this
   clear to users (either when the Web service is being configured, or
   when it is accessed).

   The Telematic Interworking functionality of the SMSC addressed by the
   pid-qualifier is not necessarily implemented by the SMSC being used,
   and SMSC providers are known for not or not correctly supporting some
   or all pid-qualifier values.  User agents SHOULD take into account
   that the success rate of SMS messages being sent using pid-qualifiers
   is lower than that of "plain" SMS messages.

5. Change Log

5.1 From -00 to -01

   o  Added the "sms-body" field and its processing rules.

   o  Added Section Section 3 about using "sms" URIs as query strings
      for SMS Web services.




Wilde & Vaha-Sipila     Expires October 15, 2002               [Page 10]

Internet-Draft    URI scheme for GSM Short Message Service    April 2002


   o  Fixed typo in ABNF (said "global-phone" instead of "gstn-phone").

   o  Added some explanatory text about form submissions using email
      Telematic Interworking.

   o  Added some text about character encoding in form submissions.


5.2 From -01 to -02

   o  Changed the sms-body field to URL encoded UTF-8 characters.


5.3 From -02 to -03

   o  Changed ordering of "change Log" section (descending to
      ascending).

   o  Clarified the wording at the beginning of Section Section 2.2
      about only the keywords of the scheme being case-insensitive.

   o  Changed "sms-body" to be a URI query string.

   o  Added some text describing "sms" URIs as addressing resources.

Normative References

   [HTML401]                     Raggett, D., Le Hors, A. and I. Jacobs,
                                 "HTML 4.01 Specification", W3C REC-
                                 html401, December 1999, <http://
                                 www.w3.org/TR/html401/>.

   [RFC2119]                     Bradner, S., "Key words for use in RFCs
                                 to Indicate Requirement Levels", RFC
                                 2119, March 1997.

   [RFC2234]                     Crocker, D. and P. Overell, "Augmented
                                 BNF for Syntax Specifications: ABNF",
                                 RFC 2234, November 1997.

   [RFC2279]                     Yergeau, F., "UTF-8, a transformation
                                 format of ISO 10646", RFC 2279, January
                                 1998.

   [RFC2396]                     Berners-Lee, T., Fielding, R. and L.
                                 Masinter, "Uniform Resource Identifiers
                                 (URI): Generic Syntax", RFC 2396,
                                 August 1998.



Wilde & Vaha-Sipila     Expires October 15, 2002               [Page 11]

Internet-Draft    URI scheme for GSM Short Message Service    April 2002


   [SMS]                         European Telecommunications Standards
                                 Institute, "Digital Cellular
                                 Telecommunications System (Phase 2+);
                                 Technical realization of the Short
                                 Message Service (SMS); Point-to-Point
                                 (PP)", December 1998, <http://
                                 pda.etsi.org/pda/home.asp?wki_id=6822>.

   [SMS-CHAR]                    European Telecommunications Standards
                                 Institute, "ETSI TS 100 901 (GSM 03.38
                                 version 7.2.0 Release 1998): Digital
                                 Cellular Telecommunications System
                                 (Phase 2+); Alphabets and language-
                                 specific information", July 1999,
                                 <http://pda.etsi.org/pda/
                                 home.asp?wki_id=6821>.

   [draft-allocchio-gstn-03]     Allocchio, C., "Text string notation
                                 for Dial Sequences and GSTN / E.164
                                 addresses", draft-allocchio-gstn-03
                                 (work in progress), March 2002.

   [draft-wilde-sms-service-03]  Wilde, E., "Registration of GSTN SMS
                                 Service Qualifier", draft-wilde-sms-
                                 service-03 (work in progress), January
                                 2002.

Non-Normative References

   [RFC2368]            Hoffmann, P., Masinter, L. and J. Zawinski, "The
                        mailto URL scheme", RFC 2368, June 1998.

   [RFC2629]            Rose, M., "Writing I-Ds and RFCs using XML", RFC
                        2629, June 1999.

   [RFC2806]            Vaha-Sipila, A., "URLs for Telephone Calls", RFC
                        2806, April 2000.

   [RFC2838]            Zigmond, D. and M. Vickers, "Uniform Resource
                        Identifiers for Television Broadcasts", RFC
                        2838, May 2000.

   [uri-clarification]  World Wide Web Consortium, "URIs, URLs, and
                        URNs: Clarifications and Recommendations 1.0",
                        W3C uri-clarification , September 2001, <http://
                        www.w3.org/TR/uri-clarification/>.





Wilde & Vaha-Sipila     Expires October 15, 2002               [Page 12]

Internet-Draft    URI scheme for GSM Short Message Service    April 2002


Authors' Addresses

   Erik Wilde
   Swiss Federal Institute of Technology
   ETH-Zentrum
   8092 Zurich
   Switzerland

   Phone: +41-1-6325132
   EMail: ietf@dret.net
   URI:   http://dret.net/netdret/


   Antti Vaha-Sipila
   Nokia

   EMail: antti.vaha-sipila@nokia.com

Appendix A. Where to send Comments

   Please send all comments about this document to Erik Wilde.

Appendix B. Acknowledgements

   This document has been written using the IETF document DTD described
   in RFC 2629 [RFC2629].

   Thanks to Claudio Allocchio for his comments.























Wilde & Vaha-Sipila     Expires October 15, 2002               [Page 13]

Internet-Draft    URI scheme for GSM Short Message Service    April 2002


Full Copyright Statement

   Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2002).  All Rights Reserved.

   This document and translations of it may be copied and furnished to
   others, and derivative works that comment on or otherwise explain it
   or assist in its implementation may be prepared, copied, published
   and distributed, in whole or in part, without restriction of any
   kind, provided that the above copyright notice and this paragraph are
   included on all such copies and derivative works.  However, this
   document itself may not be modified in any way, such as by removing
   the copyright notice or references to the Internet Society or other
   Internet organizations, except as needed for the purpose of
   developing Internet standards in which case the procedures for
   copyrights defined in the Internet Standards process must be
   followed, or as required to translate it into languages other than
   English.

   The limited permissions granted above are perpetual and will not be
   revoked by the Internet Society or its successors or assigns.

   This document and the information contained herein is provided on an
   "AS IS" basis and THE INTERNET SOCIETY AND THE INTERNET ENGINEERING
   TASK FORCE DISCLAIMS ALL WARRANTIES, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING
   BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF THE INFORMATION
   HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF
   MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.

Acknowledgement

   Funding for the RFC Editor function is currently provided by the
   Internet Society.



















Wilde & Vaha-Sipila     Expires October 15, 2002               [Page 14]


